---
title: September 10th, 2020
---

## [[zotero]] plugin for [[Roam]] error
### if extensions.roamexport.indent_tag_as_child set to blockquote, then two successive blockquotes in a note will lead to export script not running

### set to "false"

## [[Free Private Cities]]
### #[[sparring session]] [[Rahim Taghizadegan]] [[Marc-Felix Otto]]
#### virtuelle Assistenz {{encrypt U2FsdGVkX19ZWeYn05mnWOBD8zFdZzZRkYMoRoMnFAvX8A6R0tYuQ7Rxs7R1vLg6}}

#### Monaco-Konferenz jedes Jahr

#### Neuer Ambassador Tel Aviv, Venture Fund

#### Nächstes Paper: Brücke zwischen Kratik und FPC – katallaktische "Politik"

#### Research project: Weltkarte mit Klassifikation aller politischen Innovationen, Bewertung nach:
##### frei - wie autonom

##### privat - wie katallaktisch

##### städtisch - reale Verdichtung von Ideen-, Talent-, Kapitalaustausch

##### oder Wishlist:
###### 1) BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL FREEDOM: The Free Private City has the power to regulate business and commercial law at its own discretion. This includes labor law, building law and environmental law regulations, which facilitate the establishment and implementation of companies. This also includes the possibility of concluding transactions in any currency and being able to set up companies quickly and easily.

###### 2) FINANCIAL AND SOCIAL FREEDOM: The Free Private City may establish its own tax, customs and social regime, independent of the regulations of the host state.

###### 3) PROPERTY RIGHTS: The acquisition of property, including real estate, is possible without further hurdles and in a legally secure manner in accordance with the rules of the Free Private City. Such acts shall be recognized by the host State.

###### 4) LEGAL RECOGNITION OF THE CITIZENS: The legal position of the city residents (under the Residents’ Contract with the operator of the city) is recognized by the host State, even if some are also its own citizens.

###### 5) SELF-GOVERNANCE: Justice, police and administration are carried out under the city’s own control and by their own staff.

###### 6) INTERNAL AFFAIRS AUTONOMY: The host State and its organs shall not interfere in the internal affairs of the city, its inhabitants or businesses.

###### 7) HUMAN RIGHTS: Fundamental freedoms such as freedom of opinion, freedom of assembly and equality before the law are guaranteed, even if the host nation has conflicting legislation.

###### 8) MIGRATORY CONTROL: The Free Private City is entitled to expel unwanted persons or to deny them entry, even if they are citizens of the host state.

###### 9) STATUS GUARANTEE: The status of the Free Private City is guaranteed by the host state for a long period (ideally 99 years).

###### 10) INVESTOR PROTECTION: All investments made in the Free Private City are subject to special contractually guaranteed investor protection.

## [[monday.com]]
### [monday (dapulse) vs Trello - What you need to know | monday.com](https://monday.com/better_than_trello/)
#### Outside the realm of small tasks, the KANBAN way of doing things crumbles.

#### KANBAN is not a strategic tool, it's a tactical tool. A list of tasks is a short term thing and it keeps you focused on what's urgent.

#### The KANBAN-[[Trello]] way focuses on action items alone, it doesn't enable you to plan ahead.

#### Great management is about each employee knowing what the company needs to do! Showing everyone in your company the Big Picture of the company's goals, focuses and state of things, gets everyone aligned and motivated.

#### Giving someone a list of tasks, day in and day out, can feel Sisyphean. But showing them the Big Picture ties them emotionally to the company's goals as they see how their personal effort translates to something bigger and substantial.

#### KANBAN can't handle New Features
##### Features are far more complex than a list of tasks. Managing new features is a multidimensional process, involving cross-team communication with high coordination levels, an often non-linear progress and flexible estimations. This can not be achieved with a flat single layer display.

## Copying references in [[Roam]]
### Holding the alt (option) key, when dragging blocks around has always copied refs. Previously, the action would include refs all the blocks nested below - now will only do this if you also hold the shift key

### https://www.loom.com/share/7e611c03917e4e8591a5975fd102eb67

## Companies ([[project]]s) on the [[platform for [[exchange of assets]]]] are new Users without an [[Honor]] [[Bet]]

## Tonprobe für [[Studium generale]]
### Set-up mit shure-Mikrofonen, eine Audiospur mit extra zoom-account für Raum

### scheint hinreichend gut – bis auf leichtes Abhacken gelegentlich
