---
title: September 2nd, 2020
---

## Using [[Roam]] for [[Studium generale]]
### When referencing a block starting with `block starts..` one start typing `((block star))` and wait until auto complete suggest the correct block

### disadvantage: even at this early stage, this takes very long, sometimes one even has to type the first 5-6 words in order to have the correct block suggested
#### then only alternative to drag&drop is "copy block ref" on right click on bullet point and pasting 

## Task-Management for [[Plattform-Projekt]]
### Stories not in roam, but in Task-Management Board

### Specified terminology for marking blocks or pages that concern the [[Plattform-Projekt]] 

### Using "member" or "shareholder" or "student" instead of "User" when writing Stories

## How [[Conor White-Sullivan]] uses [[Roam]] 
### uses 25 [[database]]s with different collaborators
#### "we encourage people to just use one database"

### [[How to work with synonymous concepts]]
#### put on top-level of all synonymous [[page]] an or-query with all synonyms

#### using a [[claim]] as a [[page]] title as above does not seem to be a recommended use

### does not put much input in [[page]], but only uses them for connections and filters linked references on page to find something

### [[tag]] a bunch of blocks by nesting them under [[tag]]

### uses [[tag]] to mark quotes

### [[map]] blocks in flow charts by using block references within diagram

## publish [[Roam]] [[database]] as website
### [roaman.pub](http://roaman.pub)

### specify entry points: tag [[page]] as `#EntryPoint`

### Make a page called "SR Metadata" (case-sensitive). This is where general information about your site will live. The two most important properties are Title and Nav Bar Links.
Example:
Title::My Public Roam Site
Nav Bar::Links

### done for [scholarium.roaman.pub](http://scholarium.roaman.pub)

## Warum gibt es manchmal ein Leerzeichen am Ende eines Blocks? Weil man nach einem # mit dem Schlüsselwort kein Return eingeben kann; man muss zuerst ein Leerzeichen tippen, dann funktioniert Return. => "unsaubere" Blocks mit einem überzähligen Leerzeichen.

## Roam eignet sich sehr gut, um schreibend Gedanken zu entwickeln – eigentlich wie jedes andere Schreibgerät auch – doch hat man hier die Hoffnung, dass man das Geschriebene passend vernetzt wiederfindet. Allerdings ist das Geschriebene hernach schwer nachzuvollziehen, es ist nur noch Dokumentation des Gedankengangs; interessieren dürfte nur das Ergebnis. #Zettelkasten #verzetteln

## It looks like that it doesn't make any sense to formulate ideas in stories, so we decide to delete the [[story]] [[Kanban]] board
### 90% der Stories, die geschrieben werden, werden nie umgesetzt

## "social market" [Zora](https://ourzora.com/): limited edition goods are "dropped" by artists with their own crypto token. Scarcity should motivate buyers to buy the token in advance to be able to buy and resell the goods, but buying for delivery is possible by credit card.
### $92,372 in trading volume, $2.7k in trading fees
