---
title: August 25th, 2020
---

## [[Problem-Solving]] could be -from a technical point of view- a category of [[asset]] in [[exchange of assets]] without the need of further specification of [[problems]] at all when creating [[bids]] and [[offers]] which would allow to create [[[[Credit]] of Trust]] for [[problem-solvers]]
### The exact [[specification]] of the [[problem]] and decision-making process who will solve the [[problem]] could happen off-chain, ending in a [[gift exchange]] between the [[problem-solver]] and the party who needs the [[problem]] to be solved.
#### With this solution it would also make sense to move the specification and handling of [[problems]] into a more project oriented user interface, maybe even a [[kanban]] board.

#### As a project I want to agree on an efficient and transparent handling of problems #story

## In my experience,  [[tag]] are useless in collaborative thinking because there is no way to consistently apply words to subjects (which are subjective). Tagging creates uselessly large clouds of words, so that finding the right tag becomes a time-wasting chore.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:db5e7396-dff5-45f8-bb02-c4269cd2dade
:END:
### but maybe trying to find the right [[tag]] is wrong, maybe it is useful to just have a huge cloud of terms, many of them synonymous, to enhance chance discovery
#### [[How to work with synonymous concepts]]

#### therefore, greying out is right for [[tag]]

#### I rather work with [[page]], but maybe [[page]] should be reserved for [[evergreen notes]]? Does not make sense because using the wiki-link for terms is more intuitive than using hash when writing
##### [[tag]] therefore should not be used for words within sentences but for adding context to blocks
###### maybe for [[Topics]], which are more general than concepts and [[claim]]

## [[evergreen notes]] in [[Roam]]: "For things I consider permanent I have been creating a page, but then in the page the first bullet is often also a title, that way I can easily block embed to the top node and get its children somewhere else. I for now prefer this approach, as then my evergreens are easily discoverable in the search, and visible in the all pages view. Kind of the [[[[evergreen notes]]' title is like API]] concept." (Roam-Slack)

## "Block references (()) and Block links [[]] are now available on [[Workflowy]]'s beta channel." (Roam-Slack)

## Customers, Employees and Investors are conceptually similar relations with a [[project]] - putting resources in with the end to get something out
### many other resources than money may be relevant
#### status, bragging rights and promotion on public surfaces of project
##### promotion as advertisement space or channel sold by [[project]]

#### private use of facilities and products (including "early builds", Alpha-Versions)

#### [[shares]] give power to decide on resources provided
##### 50%+ power is a bit blunt. Any way to incentivize consensus?

##### Can dividends as one-size-fits-all payout be replaced by more individual arrangements?

## Fundraising for [[Mises MEM Lviv]] through ICO: Mises Coin?
### very hard to avoid shaming for abuse of Mises name for shitcoin
#### how to distinguish from shitcoin?
##### is a coin that does no aim for speculators a shitcoin?

##### no pre-mined coins for founders?

##### no listing on exchanges?

### utility token to allow access for self and others (gifting) to [[Mises MEM Lviv]]
#### time token

#### automatic buying by visitors who pay/donate in other assets at location
##### this way appreciation possible

## [[scholarium.at]] [[calendly]] vs. [[doodle]]
### [[doodle]] seems to offer what [[calendly]] does, but in addition group scheduling of events

### how to offer only one opportunity the schedule meeting on Investing page?

## [[tools]] are shared concepts like [[claim]], [[Topics]], [[terms]], thus linking ideas and experiences of different people
### [[tools]] have links between each other: "leading to other tool in workflow", "complementing", "making obsolete by being better than"
#### [[links between blocks produce structure]]

### [[tools]] are part of tech stacks for [[project]]

### [[tools]] as [[type of block or page]] denoted in [[attribute]]

## [[scholarium.at]]
### [[online courses]]: units in [[WPCourseware]] can be set as teaser/preview - can then be accessed without user account, specific link is needed
#### [[Mailchimp]] can send this link to new Leads

### [[Sendowl]] tells [[Wishlist]] to create a new account for e-mail, if not already existing

### [[Transactional E-Mails]]
#### [[Sendowl]] sends two e-mails
##### confirmation
###### is deactivated

##### receipt

#### [[Wishlist]] sends e-mail with username/password if new user account created

#### [[Mailchimp]] may send e-mail after purchase on [[Sendowl]]
##### only with Zapier, costs extra

##### no direct [[Sendowl]] integration

#### Address as "Lieber Unterstützer", per Sie

### [[Studium generale]]
#### Students need [[Zoom]] links
##### Microphone alternative: Jabra Speak 810

##### Two Jabra Speak 710 seem to be better

#### Students need access to [[Roam]]

#### Students need video on how to use [[Roam]]

### [[Scholien]]
#### Relaunch als [[[[scholarium.at]]-Inhalte als [[digital garden]]]]

#### Import alter Texte in [[Obsidian]]

#### Fortsetzung als dynamische FAQ in [[Obsidian]]
##### Vorteil: Leichtere Umsetzung mit [[Gatsby]]

#### Problem: Zugangskontrolle. Umsetzung mit [[Wishlist]]-API
