---
title: August 3rd, 2020
---

## [[Use [[tag]] to filter blocks according to user focus]]: queries can be created and saved as favorites, like pages

## {{embed ((((bfb169ea-5438-40c4-976d-18c95000b8c9))))}}

## [[commenting and discussing blocks]]

## Evidence is a kind of [[argument]] – an empirical one

## [[decision]] tree like [[argument]] trees
### Some [[argument]]s build upon others, lead to others, add to others

### How to get hierarchical structure of arguments/claims/decisions? 
#### Only by nesting?

## Should claims/[[argument]]s be [[pages versus blocks]]?

## [[Ideas vs tasks]]
### Are tasks part of [[decision]]-making (which is linked to [[exchange of ideas]]) or part of [[exchange of talent]]
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:fc197b23-1a50-49e8-84cb-4e76f8e6233f
:END:
#### Specification of tasks = [[decision]]-making, needs [[Wisdom]]
##### no, needs responsibility under uncertainty, [[Wisdom]] for inspiration 

#### task completion = production, needs [[Skill]]

## https://twitter.com/spyblog/status/1290142930552979457 [[Cachebox]]

## not clear how headings are used in [[Roam]]
### blocks following headings are not nested, thus heading seems to be only a formatting feature without structural distinction

## Structuring the whole thing is really hard!
### Roam is not a tool for structuring but for discovering connections

## [[GPT3]]: https://gpt3examples.com/#examples

## [[argument]]: [Argument map - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map) #[[Roam-Highlights]] 
### A written text can be transformed into an argument map by following a sequence of steps. [Monroe Beardsley](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monroe_Beardsley)'s 1950 book Practical Logic recommended the following procedure:[(12)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map#cite_note-Beardsley-12)
#### Separate statements by brackets and number them.

#### Put circles around the logical indicators.

#### Supply, in parenthesis, any logical indicators that are left out.

#### Set out the statements in a diagram in which arrows show the relationships between statements.

### Beardsley gave the first example of a text being analysed in this way:
#### Though ① [people who talk about the "social significance" of the arts don’t like to admit it], ② [music and painting are bound to suffer when they are turned into mere vehicles for propaganda]. For ③ [propaganda appeals to the crudest and most vulgar feelings]: (for) ④ [look at the academic monstrosities produced by the official Nazi painters]. What is more important,⑤ [art must be an end in itself for the artist], because ⑥ [the artist can do the best work only in an atmosphere of complete freedom].
##### Beardsley said that the conclusion in this example is statement ②. Statement ④ needs to be rewritten as a declarative sentence, e.g. "Academic monstrosities [were] produced by the official Nazi painters." Statement ① points out that the conclusion isn't accepted by everyone, but statement ① is omitted from the diagram because it doesn't support the conclusion. Beardsley said that the logical relation between statement ③ and statement ④ is unclear, but he proposed to diagram statement ④ as supporting statement ③.

### More recently, philosophy professor Maralee Harrell recommended the following procedure:[(13)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map#cite_note-13)
#### Identify all the claims being made by the author.

#### Rewrite them as independent statements, eliminating non-essential words.

#### Identify which statements are premises, sub-conclusions, and the main conclusion.

#### Provide missing, implied conclusions and implied premises. (This is optional depending on the purpose of the argument map.)

#### Put the statements into boxes and draw a line between any boxes that are linked.

#### Indicate support from premise(s) to (sub)conclusion with arrows.

### Standards
#### Argument Interchange Format
##### Main article: [Argument Interchange Format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_Interchange_Format)

##### The Argument Interchange Format, AIF, is an international effort to develop a representational mechanism for exchanging argument resources between research groups, tools, and domains using a semantically rich language.[(45)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map#cite_note-45) AIF-RDF is the extended ontology represented in the [Resource Description Framework](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Description_Framework) Schema (RDFS) semantic language. Though AIF is still something of a moving target, it is settling down.[(46)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map#cite_note-46)

#### Argdown
##### Argdown is a [Markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown)-inspired [lightweight markup language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightweight_markup_language) for complex argumentation.[(49)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map#cite_note-49) It is intended for exchanging arguments and argument reconstructions in a universally accessible and highly [human-readable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human-readable) way. The Argdown syntax is accompanied by tools that facilitate coding and transform Argdown documents into argument maps.[(50)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_map#cite_note-50)

##### [The Syntax | Argdown](https://argdown.org/syntax/#relations-of-reconstructed-arguments) #[[Roam-Highlights]]
###### while a statement is structurally simple, an argument always has to consist of at least three elements:
####### one (or more) premises,

####### a conclusion and

####### an inference from the premises to the conclusion.

###### This internal structure is called a **premise-conclusion-structure** (pcs)

###### A complex argument consists of a sequence of "inferential steps" from premises to conclusions in which each conclusion is used together with new premises to derive the next conclusion.

###### statement titles come in square brackets and assign a statement to an [equivalence class](https://argdown.org/syntax/#equivalence-classes).

###### Argument titles come in __angle brackets__ and assign a description to an __argument__

###### Premise-conclusion-structures are list-like block elements with [pcs-statements](https://argdown.org/syntax/#pcs-statements) as numbered list items. Pcs-statements are normal statements preceded by a pcs index number in round brackets.

###### There are currently two types of pcs-statements: premises and conclusions. Conclusions look like premises, except that they are preceded by an inference. An inference element is separating a conclusion from preceding pcs-statements by a series of hyphens.

###### A pcs is a block element that can only occur at the top-level of the document, never inside other block elements. You assign a pcs to an argument, by inserting it as next top-level element directly behind an argument definition or reference.

###### Inferences in premise-conclusion-structures can be marked simply by a line of at least four hyphens. This is called a "collapsed inference".

###### You can also specify which inference rules were used or add YAML data to the inference. In this case you have to use the "expanded" inference mode. An expanded inference starts and ends with a line of at least two hyphens. In between these lines you can add a list of inference rules and/or a YAML data element.
####### Add a __relation symbol__ (+, -, _, ><) plus, possibly, a __direction symbol__ (< or >) to define the type of relation.

###### Relations can have two directions: forward-pointing (>) or backward-pointing (<).

###### In **loose mode** the possible relations between two statements are "support" and "attack". In **strict mode** the possible relations between two statements are "entailment", "contrariness" and "contradiction".

###### The loose interpretation mode is useful for the first rough sketch of a debate or for newcomers to argument reconstruction, who often do not distinguish clearly between arguments and statements.

###### Switching to strict mode gives you more expressive power. You can now distinguish between logical relations between statements (entailment, contrariness, contradiction) and dialectical support and attack relations between an argument and a statement (or another argument).

###### If you have defined relations in an argument's pcs, the Argdown parser will automatically derive the argument's relations from the __incoming__ relations of its premises and the __outgoing__ relations of its main conclusion.

###### Derivation of outgoing relations of an argument's main conclusion from an argument's outgoing relations

###### It is derived that the main conclusion of argument a
####### is **contrary** to another statement s if a is **attacking** s.

####### is **attacking** argument b if a is **attacking** b.

####### is **entailing** another statement s if a is **supporting** s.

####### is **supporting** argument b if a is **supporting** b.

####### is **undercutting** another argument's inference i if a is **undercutting** i.

#### [[argument]] mapping seems to presuppose having all relevant arguments at hand, which is unrealistic. 
##### all examples are simplistic

##### best for analytical philosophy, bad for empirical sciences

## https://noduslabs.com/cases/visualize-connections-notes-roam-research-infranodus/ [[Graph]]

## [[Stories]]

## [[size [[Stories]]]] as [[attribute]]

## 
