---
title: September 1st, 2020
---

## Collaboration by coincidence:
### You must have a roam-css with strict formatting rules

### You must to write in the same language

### {{embed ((0dee14a2-48f7-4e96-b87f-6f18ada43ca4))}}

### Try this: [multiple Databases](https://github.com/anthilemoon/gatsby-n-roamresearch/tree/master/packages/gatsby-source-roamresearch#sourcing-from-multiple-roam-research-databases)
#### collaboration may be enabled by selective export from multiple individual databases to one collective database and selective import back
##### this, however, would need a common language of [[tag]] and/or [[attribute]] and even [[concept]]s, otherwise there would be no connections

### Import into a Gatsby Theme

## there may be a paradoxical approach to UI [[design]] that is working, with [[Roam]] as an example
### focus on right tools for needs, not just simplicity

### [When Complexity Breeds Community - Making Connections by Jax](https://jax.substack.com/p/when-complexity-breeds-community)
#### The onboarding experience broke every rule. I signed up, had no idea what to do next, and spent the next two days on YouTube searching through tutorials learning how to get the most out of the product.

#### In product design, your goal is to reduce time-to-value for users.

#### But for the new wave of horizontal software tools like Notion, Airtable and Roam, the magic is in their flexibility. By providing the “no-code” building blocks, these startups enable consumers to create their own personalised experience.

#### **This creates a "complexity gap". **

#### In the early days, before the team can set up templates and best practice guides, there’s a cold start problem — **when someone signs up, it can be hard to understand how the product works, so it's easy to lose customers in that first mile.**

#### But rather than dying, these products thrived.

#### Their early adopters overcame the barriers to adoption and adored the end result. They shared their new workflows with the world and wanted to learn how others used the product.

#### **Leading to emergent communities of fans who congregate online and in-person to compare notes.**

#### And [Notion’s Community page](https://www.notion.so/Notion-Community-04f306fbf59a413fae15f42e2a1ab029) shares IRL meetups in cities all over the world

#### Those who reach boss mode are proud of their accomplishments and want to share their findings with the next cohort of users, earning social status in the process.

#### **This makes it incrementally easier for each new cohort of users to level up, and by the time mainstream users arrive**

#### [Deciem](https://deciem.com/default?ccvis=1) is a beauty brand that embraces complexity.
##### The Ordinary sells the same active ingredients as the luxury brands, but with none of the marketing, sticking with simple packaging and product names like “__Hyaluronic Acid 2% + B5”__. They expose the inflated margins of their competitors by selling these ingredients at <$20.

##### Early adopters in the beauty world quickly caught on, and now there are [Facebook groups](https://www.facebook.com/groups/theordinarychatroombybbe/) with 150k followers dedicated to helping new consumers understand what they should buy

#### **So if you're building a necessarily complex product, you can bridge the time-to-value problem in the early days by leaning into your deeply engaged early adopters and helping them form a community, allowing your users to do the onboarding experience you don’t yet have the resources to create yourself.**
