---
title: August 1st, 2020
---

## [How the language you speak changes your view of the world](https://theconversation.com/how-the-language-you-speak-changes-your-view-of-the-world-40721) #quote
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:d9b92d0c-45bb-4e7d-b754-5004857a53ca
:END:
### Going back and forth between languages appears to be a kind of brain training, pushing your brain to be flexible.

### Just as regular exercise gives your body some biological benefits, mentally controlling two or more languages gives your brain cognitive benefits. This mental flexibility pays big dividends especially later in life: the typical signs of cognitive ageing occur [later in bilinguals](http://kwistuup.net/_/mss/BIALYSTOK_etal_2008.pdf) – and the onset of age-related degenerative disorders such as dementia or Alzheimer’s are delayed in bilinguals [by up to five years](http://www.neurology.org/content/early/2013/11/06/01.wnl.0000436620.33155.a4).

### We showed German-English bilinguals video clips of events with a motion in them, such as a woman walking towards a car

### When you give a scene like that to a monolingual German speaker they will tend to describe the action but also the goal of the action. So they would tend to say “A woman walks towards her car” or “a man cycles towards the supermarket”. English monolingual speakers would simply describe those scenes as “A woman is walking” or “a man is cycling”, without mentioning the goal of the action.

### The worldview assumed by German speakers [is a holistic one](http://www.degruyter.com/view/j/ling.2012.50.issue-4/ling-2012-0026/ling-2012-0026.xml) – they tend to look at the event as a whole – whereas English speakers tend to zoom in on the event and focus only on the action.

### The linguistic basis of this tendency appears to be rooted in the way different grammatical tool kits situated actions in time. English requires its speakers to grammatically mark events that are ongoing, by obligatorily applying the __–ing__ morpheme: “I am playing the piano and I cannot come to the phone” or “I was playing the piano when the phone rang”. German doesn’t have this feature.

### we asked subjects to decide whether a scene with an ambiguous goal (a woman walks down a road toward a parked car) was more similar to a clearly goal-oriented scene (a woman walks into a building) or a scene with no goal (a woman walks down a country lane).

### German monolinguals matched ambiguous scenes with goal-oriented scenes more frequently than English monolinguals did. This difference mirrors the one found for language usage: German speakers are more likely to focus on possible outcomes of people’s actions, but English speakers pay more attention to the action itself.

### bilingual speakers, they seemed to switch between these perspectives based on the language context they were given the task in.

### Distracting one language seemed to automatically bring the influence of the other language to the fore.

### When judging risk, bilinguals also tend to [make more rational economic decisions](http://news.uchicago.edu/article/2012/04/25/thinking-foreign-language-helps-economic-decision-making) in a second language. In contrast to one’s first language, it tends to lack the deep-seated, misleading affective biases that unduly influence how risks and benefits are perceived.

## [[Anki]] may be used to add a kind of quiz/exam tool to content - to improve didactical/instructional value of content and make [[online courses]]
### Inetgration with [[Roam]]: https://github.com/gmcmanus/anki-roam-import

## Ich empfehle, wirklich alle Gedanken/Links in [[daily notes]] festzuhalten und dann nach und nach zu verlinken, d.h. wichtige Konzepte gleich in wiki-links zu setzen.
### In der Kollaboration muss man allerdings darauf achten, dass die Konzepte nicht aneinander "vorbeigehen".
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:47c806cd-cf29-4612-95ec-5ebbefbca2c1
:END:
#### Statt Schlagwörtern Liste relevanter Subtopics?
##### Sollten Subtopics stets als Fragen formuliert sein?
###### [[Questions vs claims as titles]]
####### [[Even as a non-native speaker prefer English for [[exchange of ideas]]]]

##### how to deal with synonyms - very similar questions or claims in different wording. 
###### [[Aliases]] needed.

## Chrome-extension [Roam-Highlighter](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/roam-highlighter/mcoimieglmhdjdoplhpcmifgplkbfibp/related) is really useful to quickly grab annotations (quotes) from urls
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:2201a290-f074-4438-b83b-22f3c18805e6
:END:
### First generated block with extension: ((d9b92d0c-45bb-4e7d-b754-5004857a53ca))

### block has to be embedded to show quotes, reference only shows link to source (first block in nested hierarchy)
#### another reason to [[prefer block embed over block reference]], if editing of original block is no danger

### no need to put all references in [[zotero]]: only books, essays

### does not show highlights as quotes with attribution, thus better to use [[zotero]] for all articles with original thought

## [[Bibliothek im scholarium]]

## [[[[Roam]]-Datenbanken]]

## [[[[decision]]s more important than notes]]

## Nick Szabo, [Unenumerated: More short takes](https://unenumerated.blogspot.com/2012/07/more-short-takes.html) #quote
### Not only should you disagree with others, but you should disagree with yourself. Totalitarian thought asks us to consider, much less accept, only one hypothesis at a time. By contrast [[quantum thought]], as I call it -- although it already has a traditional name less recognizable to the modern ear, scholastic thought -- demands that we simultaneoulsy consider often mutually contradictory possibilities. Thinking about and presenting only one side's arguments gives one's thought and prose a false patina of consistency: a fallacy of thought and communications similar to [false precision](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_precision), but much more common and imporant. Like false precision, it can be a mental mistake or a misleading rhetorical habit. In quantum reality, by contrast, I can be both for and against a proposition because I am entertaining at least two significantly possible but inconsistent hypotheses, or because I favor some parts of a set of ideas and not others. If you are unable or unwilling to think in such a quantum or scholastic manner, it is much less likely that your thoughts are worthy of others' consideration.

### [Quantum thought | Hacker Noon](https://hackernoon.com/quantum-thought-7456231bf75d) #quote
#### mental concept, [dubbed](http://unenumerated.blogspot.co.id/2012/07/more-short-takes.html) “[[quantum thought]]” by Szabo. According to him, this approach to thinking comes from law school: “You need to take both the defenders and the plaintiffs side of the issue”. He continues:__“Run down the arguments as if each one of the would be true, even if they and their sub arguments contradict each other. You have to keep both of them in your mind at once”.__
##### Naval Ravikant agrees with Szabo about the importance of this approach, adding:

##### “This is not how we are socially taught to think. Socially we are taught that you have to have a point of view, you have to have an answer, you have to pick a side, pick your tribe, fit in, then defend it, and be consistent. But the reality is really complicated.“

##### Then he adds:

##### “If you are really smart, and you are operating on the edge of any field, or try to figure out anything new, you probably need to have quantum thought. You probably have to hold both states in your head, constantly weighting probabilities. And if you are not shifting back and forth, then either you are not doing anything cutting edge, or you are not being intellectual honest with yourself.”

## [[online courses]]

## ((db2ede2d-0f1c-4a6b-ae7d-65c16b1e5b9f)), für [[[[scholarium.at]]-Inhalte als [[digital garden]]]]

## It is really hard to keep useful topic pages because they are not dynamic enough. Instead of keeping general topic pages like [[Overview]] it would be better to have different [[onboarding pages]] for different contributor/interest groups and gradually structure content in a more dynamic way, related to [[exchange of ideas]]
### [[Use [[tag]] to filter blocks according to user focus]]
