---
title: August 16th, 2020
---

## [How I use Obsidian to manage my goals, tasks, notes, and software development knowledge base](https://joshwin.imprint.to/post/how-i-use-obsidian-to-manage-my-goals-tasks-notes-and-software-development-knowledge-base) #quote [[Obsidian]]
### people that were reporting data loss issues on [[Roam]] and that pushed me to give Obsidian a try

### I wouldn’t be surprised if the issues that I and other users encountered are because of the approach that [[Roam]] Research took when it came to developing their software.
#### https://twitter.com/samwightt/status/1271583334041255937

### Obviously, I have lost access to a number of features from [[Roam]] Research, i.e. filters, queries, block references (every bullet point you write is a block and you can reference all of them), and editable block embeds. However, I have been able to make do and haven't really missed them.

### Obsidian has added the ability to see more of the context around the linked mention. Additionally, they have added the ability to collapse linked/unlinked mention results. They don't offer the ability to filter mentions at the moment, but it would make sense for them to eventually add it.

### The solution that's better, at the moment, depends on the type of user you are. If you are a full-time researcher or writer, I can see Roam's approach being more valuable, especially if you want to copy all your past work into it and see what type of connections you can discover. If you are someone that blogs on a casual basis, you probably won't see the lack of linked reference/mention filtering as a deal-breaker. With my workflow that does treat Obsidian like Roam (to a point), I actually haven't missed this feature.

### However, I do see the benefits of it. So, if I don't create it, someone else in the community will make a more extensive backlinks plugin that supports filtering when Obsidian's [plugin API](https://trello.com/c/Z7qqKVXd/19-public-plugin-api-v10) is released. And, even if the API doesn't include what's needed to do this, Obsidian will be incentivized to add this feature themselves if there's enough of a demand. There's already [a post that asks for this feature](https://forum.obsidian.md/t/filtering-everywhere/163) on their forum.

### these are the main reasons why I'm flying the Obsidian banner:

### **Future-Proof:** Your notes are future-proof since they use Markdown and not some type of proprietary format.

### **Portability:** You don't have to rely on Obsidian's servers in order to access your notes. You can use iCloud, Google Drive, other cloud storage providers, or even roll your own server.

### **Safe and Private:** If you use a cloud storage provide to store your notes, you won't have to worry about issues of data loss or your data getting into the wrong hands.

### **Extendability:** Obsidian uses 19 core plugins to function and there's more to come. The great thing is that we will be able to install third party plugins and be able to build our own in the future as well.

### **Good mobile experience:** Obsidian doesn't have a mobile app yet. However, with me storing my notes in iCloud, I have easy access to my notes using [iA Writer](https://ia.net/writer) on my iPhone. As a side note, if you also have an iPhone, I strongly recommend that you use iCloud to store your notes.

### Obsidian via their support of [Mermaid diagrams](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/)

### I use [Alfred's](https://www.alfredapp.com/) text expansion feature in order to speed up the creation of note titles and their associated contents.

### coined by Julia Cameron in her book called __The Artist's Way__ that was published in 1992. Here's how she describes them on her [website](https://juliacameronlive.com/basic-tools/morning-pages/):
#### [[Morning Pages]] are three pages of longhand, stream of consciousness writing, done first thing in the morning. *There is no wrong way to do Morning Pages*–they are not high art. They are not even “writing.” They are about anything and everything that crosses your mind– and they are for your eyes only. Morning Pages provoke, clarify, comfort, cajole, prioritize and synchronize the day at hand. Do not over-think Morning Pages: just put three pages of anything on the page...and then do three more pages tomorrow.

### I use Obsidian's saved search query feature in order to easily list the different types of miscellaneous tasks

### As for how I manage my notes, I'll break this up into four categories:
#### Morning Pages (Continued)

#### Evergreen Notes

#### Resource Notes

#### Miscellaneous and Knowledge Base Notes

### Under the associated comments/pages area, I use the following strategy:

### **New ideas or notes:** I create a new note and then add my thoughts to the new note that was created.

### **Thoughts related to past ideas/notes:** I reference the associated note and enter my notes beside it.

### When I complete the intention, I add "Ready to be Recorded" to the bottom of the note.

### I then run an Alfred workflow that runs a Python script that gets all of the files that were modified within three days that contain the words "Ready to be Recorded" and automatically appends each reference to the end of notes that you marked as each header notes destination.

### The nice thing about Obsidian is that it allows you to easily write code blocks. It supports syntax highlighting and you can use the one associated with a given language by putting the language (written out or abbreviated) after the first backticks.

## [[Bitnation]]

## [balajis.com auf Twitter: "Creative Commons is like copyleft for content. It’s done well, with 1B+ uses, but it may still be underutilized. I’ve been thinking for some time that you might use it as the basis of a new open source media ecosystem, where all content was free and you monetized the community. https://t.co/o3inw6D3gR" / Twitter](https://twitter.com/balajis/status/1295017039858298881) [[git]]
### All content would be fully open source & free by default, available in git repos for any use from memes to machine learning. Creators monetize by charging for access to the community.

### Imagine if you could pull any frame from any movie or any text from any article as easily as you might git pull open source software.

### One big thing would be the use of git-lfs or some equivalent for version controlling audio and video binaries. But you may also want content-aware subcommands, like “git mp4” to extract frames.

### It’s easy to create new git subcommands and make them behave natively. So you could progressively build up a suite of tools for pulling & manipulating files from a set of decentralized media repos. Which may become something like pip and pypi.
#### https://www.atlassian.com/git/articles/extending-git
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:92088fe4-a25c-450d-b59e-57e242783bee
:END:

## {{embed ((2ec852ff-2342-4e96-8b4f-13b1ea1fb64f))}}

## {{embed ((c0b5d7b3-43f0-4bd8-86ef-62389bbe3275))}}

## {{embed ((186cffa7-a634-4ebe-8203-80242a13ab43))}}

## [[Transclusion]] [Transclusion is limited by the data model’s composability](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/z7DvEiUpF6dYkFGbpZZTBKQVM9jjNnx8D8Xzu) 
### The expressive capacity of Transclusion is hugely dependent on how composable the transcludable objects are.

### Arbitrary prose paragraphs aren’t effectively usable in multiple places: good prose depends on arc, narrative, context. Text transclusion is almost always disjointed. I fear that most of the system designers who have been excited about this approach are in love with an idea about technology, rather than an idea about writing or communication.

### Figma “components” are an interesting example of where something like transclusion seems to work much better. Visual elements can often be repurposed in multiple related contexts, particularly when they’re partially parametrizable.

### Arbitary sentences, paragraphs, and text ranges are not generally written to work in any context or sequence. They’re not reusable blocks; they’re highly dependent on the preceding prose.
