---
title: August 5th, 2020
---

## #story (and other [[status of block or page]]) and [[size [[Stories]]]] indicated as [[attribute]]

## [[Stories]] as [[pages versus blocks]]
### [[Stories]] as pages that contain [[claim]]

### [[prioritizing of [[Stories]]]] on a page that contains a kanban and links to all [[Stories]]

### [[As a User of [[platform for [[exchange of assets]]]] I don't want to see [[expired [[offers]]]] and [[bids]] for [[exchange of talent]] so the view doesn't get messy.]]

## New [[feature in [[Roam]]]]: comment-button {{comment-button null}}
### does not seem to work well currently

## [Web Discussions: Flat by Design](https://blog.codinghorror.com/web-discussions-flat-by-design/) #quote contradicts [[Indentation for structure]]
### few threaded discussion models survive on the web [...] the vast majority are flat

### threading tends to break crucial parts of discussion like reading and replying in deep, fundamental, unfixable ways.

### threaded discussion is ultimately too complex to survive on the public Internet

### Rigid hierarchy is generally not how the human mind works, and the strict parent-child relationship it enforces is particularly terrible for fluid human group discussion. Browsing a tree is complicated, because you have to constantly think about what level you're at, what's expanded, what's collapsed … there's always this looming existential crisis of where the heck am I? Discussion trees force me to spend too much time mentally managing that two-dimensional tree more than the underlying discussion.

### In a threaded discussion, replies can arrive any place in the tree at any time. How do you know if there are new replies? Where do you find them? Only if you happen to be browsing the tree at the right place at the right time. It's annoying to follow discussions over time when new posts keep popping up anywhere in the middle of the big reply tree. And God help you if you accidentally reply at the wrong level of the tree; then you're suddenly talking to the wrong person, or maybe nobody at all. It absolutely kills me that there might be amazing, insightful responses buried somewhere in the middle of a reply chain that I will never be able to find.

### Reply long and hard enough and you've either made the content column impossibly narrow, or you've pushed the content to exit, stage right. That's how endless pedantic responses-to-responses ruin the discussion for everyone. When we play the "indent everything to the right" game, everyone loses. It is natural to scroll down on the web, but it is utterly unnatural to scroll right. Indentation takes the discussion in the wrong direction.

### You think because you clicked "reply" and your post is indented under the person you're replying to, that your post is talking only to that person? That's so romantic. Maybe the two of you should get a room. A special, private room at the far, far, far, far, far right of that threaded discussion. This illusion that you are talking to one other person ends up harming the discussion for everyone by polluting the tree with these massive narrow branches that are constantly in the way.

### At an absolute minimum you're addressing everyone else in that discussion, but in reality, you're talking to anyone who will listen, for all time. Composing your reply as if it is a reply to just one person is a quaint artifact of a world that doesn't exist any more. Every public post you make on the Internet, reply or not, is actually talking to everyone who will ever read it. It'd be helpful if the systems we used for discussion made that clear, rather than maintaining this harmful pretense of private conversations in a public space.

### Full bore, no-holds-barred threading is an unmitigated usability disaster for discussion, everywhere I've encountered it.

### The most important guidance for non-destructive use of threading is to **put a hard cap on the level of replies that you allow**. Although [Stack Exchange is not a discussion system](http://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/92107/is-stack-overflow-a-forum) – it's actually the opposite of a discussion system, which we have to explain to people all the time – we did allow, in essence, one level of threading. There are questions and answers, yes, but underneath each of those, in smaller type, are the comments.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:24fe4062-2542-4621-b29d-956f6318e001
:END:

### we allow **one level of replies and that's it**.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:c2986f64-1951-4fa8-a007-10584ee0a26a
:END:

### Stack Exchange is not a discussion system. It's a question and answer system. If you build your Q&A system like a discussion system, it will devolve into Yahoo Answers, or even worse, Quora.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:991c0a9a-cb74-4f26-b399-490c470c59c6
:END:

### Would Hacker News be a better place for discussion if they capped reply level? Would Reddit? From my perspective as a poor, harried reader and very occasional participant, absolutely. There are many chronic problems with threaded discussion, but capping reply depth is the easiest way to take a giant step in the right direction.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:51329fe4-b569-4e42-bb27-50579eb7e267
:END:

### Another idea is to let posts bring their context with them. This is one of the things that Twitter, the company that always does everything wrong and succeeds anyway, gets … shockingly right out of the gate.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:082578c2-3154-46ec-be2e-4ab7d143036a
:END:

### This idea that tweets – and thus, conversations – should be mostly standalone is not well understood, but it illustrates how Twitter got the original concept so fundamentally right. I guess that's why they can get away with the terrible execution.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:0ff2389c-ba67-47a0-935a-4ef350e1e969
:END:

## [[Stack Overflow as model for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### [Are Stack Exchange sites forums? - Meta Stack Exchange](https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/92107/are-stack-exchange-sites-forums) #quotes
#### Stack Overflow is not a discussion forum. Most forums are largely discussion-based and tend to follow less strict rules about what posts can be like.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:638d994e-0c7e-4fca-ab80-f69469b779fe
:END:

#### On Stack Overflow (and Stack Exchange in general), we require every new thread to be started with a question and every response to that question to be an attempt at answering it.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:6b64329f-7045-428c-b398-f2a69972e8c5
:END:

#### For example, on a typical forum you might ask how to run a game in windowed mode. You will get several responses, some of which will be nothing but "oh, I love that game!" or "I haven't played that in a while, wow." You'll be lucky if you get a relevant response. By contrast, on Stack Exchange you'd get [practical responses](https://gaming.stackexchange.com/q/21955/1925) that are 100% relevant to your question.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:3c48603a-5988-4bd6-aef0-947829788bcf
:END:

#### Stack Exchange creates communities that draw in experts in particular fields who are interested in communicating and learning at a professional level. This results in writing quality being an important aspect of the site.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:44ff33ae-44ec-4ec3-b5b1-2cfe69060e4f
:END:

#### **Stack Exchange encourages **__specific__** [[question]]** that have __specific__, canonical answers. A question is asked and respondents weigh in with a **carefully thought-out response** which is then vetted through voting and wiki-editing (improving on the answer).
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:15b22cf2-b557-451f-8c90-0fe677ba9578
:END:

#### The key difference is that each answer posted has to stand on its own. Stack Exchange neither supports nor encourages a "forum-style" of open, free-for-all discussion (many-to-many conversations). This is by design.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:b6670ac0-fa8c-4020-bbde-4cf5f3a672b7
:END:

#### The advantage is that users can vote on the best answers which then float to the top. You don't have to worry about breaking the conversation thread, and answers are not buried deep down in the larger context of an entire, vast "conversation."
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:9a86a8ee-1a09-406a-9b7e-f3b25a83377d
:END:

#### Stack Exchange is built on the premise that **forums don't scale.** All those open conversations mean that those forums only tend to get noisier and noisier. What inevitably happens is that long-time users get tired of the new users asking the same old questions. New users can't find useful information and feel ostracized. And most find that, the more they talk, the less __value__ they get from the experience. In short, you stop learning.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:6eee00f3-f098-4bc1-a753-e2970b00b943
:END:

## [The chat room/forum problem](https://scobleizer.blog/2009/11/02/the-chat-roomforum-problem-an-apology-to-technosailor/) #quote [[exchange of ideas]]
### chat rooms and forums start out fun and then devolve over time for various reasons.

### blogs had the opposite effect. They got more interesting over time.

### First, wave after wave of newbies came in. They all wanted their attention and you couldn’t tell the experienced users (visually) from the new ones.

### after six or so waves the experienced users started getting tired of answering the same damn [[question]] over and over. See the newbies weren’t willing to search for already-answered [[question]] and, because it was a forum, no one was able to take control and segregate things.

### Then it got worse. The bad actors arrived. IE, trolls and spammers.

### my Facebook has the forum problem. It’s getting noisier and noisier.

### As long as you only have your really close personal friends in Facebook, this is NOT a problem at all.

### But Facebook’s leaders want to change to be more like Twitter.

### Twitter is gaining in incoming value, the way blogs got more interesting over time
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:7c84943e-c9ef-472d-93d4-227e0a75267e
:END:

### bloggers get smarter over time and they have more experiences to pull on.

### Generally a talk radio host will get better over time. Why? As she or he gets more popular he/she will get better guests, be invited to better events, and become better studied on the topics they are talking about.

### In other words, they become an expert.

### I find I’m craving experts lately. People who build things. People who do things. People who make things happen.

### Tony Robbins, when he spoke at the Twitter Conference last month said that Twitter is his knowledge machine. He uses it to import great minds.

### Twitter got lists.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:f647d744-ffa9-4d6b-a014-ae86e4635a4e
:END:

### Now compare to FriendFeed. We could have built a list like this over there, but it would have gotten noiser because of a feature called “Friend of a Friend.” That drags in people the list owner didn’t invite. Also, anyone can comment underneath any items on Facebook or FriendFeed. That brings people into YOUR life that YOU DID NOT INVITE!
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:1a7e5534-114e-40d2-b8a2-4e920c952718
:END:

### Again, at first, this seems very democratic and very nice. After all, it’s great to throw a party for the whole world and let them drink your wine and have conversations with your kids. But, be honest here, would you rather have a private dinner with Steve Jobs, or would you rather have a dinner with Steve Jobs and 5,000 people who you don’t really know?
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:58cce40d-f28a-4c39-a20c-bc1512bfa89c
:END:

### Twitter does NOT have the chat room/forum problem.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:51a68f23-7552-4c2e-9533-3d2601cb3927
:END:

### And don’t think that Twitter has learned this lesson, either. It is testing a new retweet feature (they used to call it “sharing” internally) that is very controversial.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:302d0936-2567-4956-8247-04252596eb60
:END:

### Why is it controversial? Because it brings people into your view that you didn’t ask to see.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:039f7c8a-0ae6-4d71-a849-f10740b9c3e6
:END:

## [[Twitter as model for [[exchange of ideas]]]]

## [[Stories]] need to be as small as possible
### [[Stories]] need to be further and further dissected into smaller bits

### name for [[Stories]] that are originally too large, but are then dissected into a structured order of [[Stories]]: #topic

### #topic will be a page that includes an order of [[Stories]] (or [[claim]])
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:dd4abde1-3af9-4a49-a4aa-d3062f9b64b0
:END:
#### [[use #topic as [[tag]]]]

## {{embed ((2201a290-f074-4438-b83b-22f3c18805e6))}}

## multi-directional notes in [[digital garden]]
### https://twitter.com/jordanmoore/status/1290755679611953152

## can [[digital garden]] be implemented in [[wordpress]]?

## [[feature in [[Roam]]]] you can use emojis for bi-directional links and tags [[🌱]]
### difficult to write - cannot enter in search field or between brackets

## [[evergreen notes]]

## [[Even as a non-native speaker prefer English for [[exchange of ideas]]]] rephrased as [[claim]]
### German-language version as [[didactic aid]]
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:de5df76a-9fd1-4f73-bb9a-78ca690b82b6
:END:

## do not document [[tech stack]] in [[Roam]], it is visible in the code
### every one for whom [[tech stack]] is relevant should be able to read code

### how about [[Stories]] that are fulfilled with processes instead of code?
#### there, [[tech stack]] is part of the process

#### [[some [[Stories]] are fulfilled by processes]]

#### ((c432b9dd-8049-47db-b95d-fbf52bdc82fa))

## ((71f5f055-f081-47da-884b-2b37a3e56b11))
### ((f5b7f5a9-3918-47d2-875d-c90d6e726403))

## ((5fef6844-a8a8-484b-ab80-6bea0642c9e6))

## ((37567224-65bf-467e-99dd-23b39c61fb2c))
### ((74c5d526-809e-40c6-9bb3-378b52df8adb))

### ((61a9e229-8881-484b-8cb4-7dcd123e9682))
