---
title: August 8th, 2020
---

## https://infranodus.com/ [[Graph]]
### https://noduslabs.com/cases/visualize-connections-notes-roam-research-infranodus/

### {{[[youtube]] https}}

### [Venture Fiction | Nodus Labs](https://noduslabs.com/research/venture-fiction/) #[[Roam-Highlights]]
#### **Venture fiction is a practice of creating enterprises in order to communicate ideas** and not the other way round. Each enterprise proposes its own system of perception with multiple solutions. It is not there to make a statement or to generate profits. It is there to propose its own world, behavior, and episteme. **It forms a network with the rest of what’s considered to be real in order to inscribe itself into the everyday life.**

#### It is a venture because it **accepts the high risk of failure but hopes for the high gain**. It is a fiction because parts of it are never real: imagination and the impossible is what motivates it to evolve. It is an enterprise because it wants to become real and tangible through translating itself into the business practices and **embracing the interface of money** as one of the most efficient mediums to conduct transactions between the fiction and reality.

#### The criteria of success for a venture fiction is its ability to communicate with the rest of the world.

#### It’s a practice of reality sculpting based on one’s own fantasy. It uses the means and the mediums that are available
##### It is a high-risk high-gain imagination enterprise that’s seeking autonomous attention within one of the many niches it is itself creating continuously.

## 
