---
title: September 3rd, 2020
---

## #priority for me: the [[project]] of [[project]]s ;)
### Develop, with link to [[platform for [[exchange of assets]]]], a minimum viable [[platform for funding and governance of [[project]]s]]
#### #feature
##### [[create new [[project]]]]

##### [[voting mechanism for [[project]]]] on [[priority]], [[feature]], [[story]]

##### keeping track of costs, income and milestones

### {{embed ((((85053979-91c6-422c-b543-827eae89daaa))))}}

### maybe rename [[shares]] as "commitment"

### how to reward [[shares]] afterwards for investments made before platform?
#### hack by pre-agreed offers and bids

## Device for [[passwordless authentication]] and [[2FA]]: https://www.yubico.com/

## Use [[Slack]], [[Discord]], [[Telegram]], [[Signal]] or [[Whatsapp]] for communication for [[Studium generale]]?
### alumni channel on Whatsapp
#### better for small talk/networking of alumni than coordination of current students

### Telegram seems to be preferable to Whatsapp
#### best would probably be [[Threema]], but app has a price
##### maybe [[Studium generale]] pays for it on an education plan

### Slack is more easily structured than instant message apps
#### replace each [[Slack]] channel with a [[Telegram]] channel?

## A new tool that might be handy, I stumbled over. [Readwise](https://readwise.io) seems to be an interesting service to gather all my highlights in all my books (Amazon Kindle, iBooks, Instapaper, Pocket, etc.). You can even photograph a book page (Paper) and convert the image to a searchable text (it is possible to change the section of the text that should be converted).
### ((bcbab071-e998-447a-9e1f-0271ef2d55d6))
#### ((654d3d61-c785-430f-9db6-eaf85bbb1cb0))

#### ((ddc57788-75ce-4246-bfea-cc342757346e))

#### ((9d890f88-fb20-49c3-b502-34f5935e4a1c))

#### ((16ae82a7-9c1a-44d8-a312-79fb937f010f))

#### ((524c0815-3687-494a-a134-f58bc56bd948))

### And a second one that I didn‘t testdrive yet: [Hypothesis](https://web.hypothes.is/) for highlighting text on webpages.
#### [[Hypothes.is]]

### I am curios if anyone will see this note, written at the bottom at the end of the day. —— __next day: obviously, yes__ :-)

### We can gather group reactions with {{[[slider]] null}}
#### Really group reactions? I only see a slider, no summing up of votes. It shows who last moved it though.

#### It should – I moved it again (next day) – now, it shows your vote and mine. When Nat Eliasons showed it in the tutorial-graph, there were several user-icons, 20...30 summed up.

## https://twitter.com/i/status/1301415582588375040
### great for templates
#### I added my comment/reaction; now the icon of the original writer is gone.
