---
title: August 24th, 2020
---

## [[IMF]] shilling [[Cryptocurrencies]]
### https://twitter.com/IMFNews/status/1297640002604527621

## "What are the boundaries of #design", Charles Eams was asked by an interviewer, and he answered: "What are the boundaries of problems?"
### The #Designer solves #problems.

### Sometimes, the #problems are given by the client:
#### Sears can't sell refrigerators anymore, it was ugly and expensive and commissioned Raymond Loewy. He made it cheaper to produce, more functional and useable and it looked (for that time) much better (modern, streamlined).

#### The same happened – the Designer solved a given problem – in the example of the Lucky Strike packaging. George Washington Hill from American Tobacco wanted to know if Loewy can improve the Lucky Strike packaging and Loewy said, of course, put a 50.000 $ price tag onto the project and redesigned the package. Made it way cheaper (no green pigments needed anymore) and a white package looks much "cleaner" and attracted the women working in war service. It was a huge success, through reducing the production costs, but the essential was, that for the first time, a cigarette package looked the same front and back and the ingredients were written on the side. Thus, however the package lay on the table, the brand was visible.

### These day, more and more #[[Designer]]s solve their "own" #problems. The act as a a kind of #[[Lead User]]. They stumble over a problem, solve it and became entrepreneurs. Two examples are a kind of a [keyring](https://www.orbitkey.eu) and a trolley called "[G-Ro](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/netta/g-ro-revolutionary-carry-on-luggage?lang=de)". The #[[Designer]]s solved their problem and transformed into a manufacturer. To be precise: although, their vocation may still be the same: design, they changed their profession.

### Compare it to [[Stefan Merath]]'s definition: the entrepreneur works __on__ the venture, not __in__ it.

## [[tag]]: hashing them greys them out so they get less visual attention, only aesthetic difference to links
### How to Use Roam to Outline a New Article in Under 20 Minutes
#### {{[[youtube]] https}}

## Alle tagsüber gesammelten Textfragmente müssen abends ver-tagt (tagging als Systematisierung, zur #Vernetzung) werden. ^^Das Taggen ist das #Luhmann'sche Verzetteln der Gegenwart.^^ (eigentlich ein #claim ) Like so: #verzetteln #Zettelkasten
### ((db5e7396-dff5-45f8-bb02-c4269cd2dade))

## [[Container houses]] from China on alibaba.com start from 1.000 $, some look good
