---
title: September 9th, 2020
---

## [[Qravity]]
### Platform for "content" producing ventures

### [What on earth is a QCO token anyway? | by Qravity Com | Qravity | Medium](https://medium.com/qravity/what-on-earth-is-a-qco-token-anyway-d303607ce852)
#### The platform uses QCO for all monetary transactions, including purchases and rentals from the Qravity marketplace and royalties paid to content creators and project founders. The latter transactions are tied to an internal Qravity token called the Qravity Project Token (QPT), which represent ownership shares in a digital entertainment project.

#### Every time a consumer or distributor buys content on the Qravity platform, creators receive a portion of the payment in QCO based on the amount of QPT they earned for their contribution to the content’s production.

#### When a consumer pays QCO to watch a movie, the account address they sent the QCO from is set as an address with approval to access that movie.

#### For Wholesaler Content Distributors (WCD), Qravity can manually create paper contracts, convert fiat payments into QCO through exchanges on behalf of the WCDs, and inject that QCO into the platform until WCDs start using B2B blockchain transactions regularly.

#### Consumers and distributors who use QCO to pay for original premium Qravity entertainment not only pay a discounted rate, they can save up to 20% on Qravity content simply by holding QCO in their accounts. For example, a consumer gets 2% off the price of, say, a movie for every 10,000 QCO they’re holding.

#### On top of this discount model, a consumer can get a free digital download or stream each month for every 100,000 QCO they hold in their wallet

#### In addition to using QCO to purchase, rent, or license Qravity content, anyone holding the token will be able to trade it on exchanges.

#### you can help drive Qravity projects to completion through a project startup funding option called QCO Boost. This platform mechanism enables you to pre-purchase a set amount of product “distributions” (i.e. content license purchases, downloads, and streams) during the production stage at a discounted price. You can then sell your distributions for profit.

### das fehlende Stück ist der marketplace, der wohl noch nicht implementiert ist

### founders (task specifiers) and content producers (task solvers)
#### pre-determined share between those two plus platform (10%), founders max. 45%
