---
title: August 20th, 2020
---

## The use case to create [[identity-revealing]] [[bids]] and [[offers]] globally for all users of [[exchange of talent]] might be very limited or even non-existent, but still interesting enough on a project basis
### ((7c126411-eeba-4779-ac94-0fa1be987038))

### ((4557e1a7-9ed3-48be-8440-6e963d3f4226))

## [[identity-revealing]] [[bids]] and [[offers]] will be more useful when a [[neuronal reputation]] approach is implemented, so they are not globally accessible to untrustworthy users.

## [[author]] as an attribute to keep track of personal contributions

## [[Designer]] is rather a contributor of ideas to [[exchange of ideas]] than a talent for [[exchange of talent]]
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:9c92448f-f505-42df-b10f-aa67664c03e5
:END:
### Remuneration of contribution of ideas rather through [[prize]] set by company to reward useful ideas
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:6a797b04-0da4-4bff-9a8b-9d4e6b0e1797
:END:
#### Alternative: remuneration afterwards as honorable behavior within platform?
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:5589552c-7312-4cc3-a495-e85339f0e459
:END:
##### rewarding claims with [[Trust]] may increase [[Honor]]?
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:52a3c70a-9f28-49b0-9463-fb7b4bdea483
:END:

##### The point is, why will someone release a maybe good idea into the wild, not knowing if anyone will need it and, moreover, this anyone will be willing to pay for it after recognising the usefulness of that idea? 
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:6eab0ba7-2104-4a45-8320-609caca4a1a3
:END:
###### because of **reciprocity!** I think Steven Covey mentions it in "[7 habits of highly effective people](https://amzn.to/2Q7wrgq)" – approx.: if we do someone a favour, people are willing to give back, often more than what was given.
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:5b2ca8ba-8b20-4889-b0fc-068aec23a211
:END:

### [[Designer]] saves decision-making energy for [[shareholder]]
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:6a4aef0d-2a85-4b4e-bfc8-8e02f46cfe7a
:END:
#### potentially as part of [[exchange of ideas]] if claims are decisions for [[question]]/problems - [[Wisdom]] as reputation for skill of decision-making
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:a4b6e32b-2c05-4d0a-b39c-64ad7e90cb89
:END:
##### decisions need reasoning, are arguments? 
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:85522ddd-0358-4b14-a842-5b99858ab7ee
:END:

##### reduce [[question]] to [[minimum relevant question]]
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:b69750cb-2908-4328-86d4-7060961d3213
:END:

##### what is difference between problem solution in [[exchange of talent]] and decision (claim) in [[exchange of ideas]]?
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:0e7e8217-f27f-4df7-bed8-a35e599ff61a
:END:

##### sometimes spending lifetime is necessary: [[sparring session]] = consulting. To be remunerated independent of outcome?
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:a7b7ed59-7d09-4fb9-9377-40d1d2469137
:END:

## [[workflows]] are [[habits]]
### [[habits]] are regularly recurring small patterns of action

### [[habits]] are more important for long-term progress than big singular actions

## [[claim]] are decisions = answers to [[question]] and doubts
### very hard to judge outcome, easier to judge if decision is subjectively useful = convincing enough to surpass doubt and enable reasonable action

### outcome may be long delayed and not cleary attributable to decision - good or bad luck may play a larger role
#### go back on judgment of decision, if bad outcome can be attributed to it?
##### bad outcome may be empirical basis for contradictory [[claim]] which may then be prefered over original [[claim]] - this would redistribute [[Wisdom]]

## [[prize]] = endowments of [[Trust]]: users can charge with [[Trust]] to indicate importance and incentivize relevant ideas
### [[priority]] would be maps that structure the quest for knowledge - what do you want to achieve or know (as an end in itself)?
#### Are [[priority]] collected on [[author]] page?
##### [[project]] also has [[priority]], which are set and ranked by their [[shareholder]] according to number of [[shares]]
###### this would need implementation of a point system for ranking

### [[Trust]] is regularly distributed according to [[Wisdom]]-weighted contributions that are selected by user in his collection
#### collection is a personal map of open [[question]], [[claim]] and other notes or ideas that are actively saved to keep track of them

### How to separate [[database]]? 
#### This [[database]] seems to be for development of [[scholarium]] and [[Plattform-Projekt]], that is a tool for the [[exchange of ideas]] between the [[shareholder]]s of this [[project]]
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:5abee427-f7b4-4a9f-abc9-b48d67c25568
:END:

#### Personal notes would rather be in a personal [[database]]

#### Thus, each user and [[project]] would have another [[database]]
##### private [[database]] would contain everything that is not relevant for [[project]]

##### how many [[project]]s are there? [[scholarium]] and [[Plattform-Projekt]] may become a single one, [[Studium generale]] may be another one
###### problem: many notes may be relevant for three or more [[database]]s 
####### [[Roam]] currently does not allow for easy copying or moving of blocks to other [[database]] – it is likely that this feature will be added in the future, but would this happen as [[database]]-connecting block references or even embeds?

## Building better [[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]] than [[Roam]]
### = [[missing in [[Roam]]]]

### Is there a better way to structure and map a shared workflow for [[exchange of ideas]] than [[Roam]]? Every solution that is more formalized may lack ease of writing. [[RemNote]] already seems less accessible, less inviting to just add thoughts. Adding thoughts first and then connecting them on the go seems a good UI-decision. Having more formalized connections than just selecting terms to link may end up like a thousand-drawer system, where it takes too much time to find the correct drawer for everything, as in [[tag]] if they are not well used.
#### [[Links]] are important for [[exchange of ideas]], to link contributions of different people.
##### Those [[Links]] are a [[shared tagging language]] of important concepts and a [[map]] of [[claim]] and joint [[priority]]
###### [[map]]: how can arguments build upon each other? How can we get a better overview of thought taking shape? 
####### Would it be possible to have a mindmap of [[question]] and [[claim]], which are decisions of questions
######## How are [[question]] connected? By [[Topics]]? May there be an order of [[Topics]]? Or are all [[question]] following from [[priority]]? Is it about identifying stepping stones to fulfil [[priority]]?
######### [[priority]] need to be justified
########## Starting with Why

### 
