---
title: January 15th, 2021
---

## [[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]

## [NotePlan](https://noteplan.co/) #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### Jot down notes and additional to-dos as they occur to you. At the end of the day or first thing tomorrow review the note and prioritize for the next day.

### With NotePlan your day doesn't start with a list of unimportant notes and tasks that were automatically carried over from yesterday. Instead, you start your day with a blank canvas, which is like a built-in purging system. You have a daily notepad for quick ideas, pieces of information, meeting notes, or tasks that need to be jotted down.

### Make bi-directional [connections] between your notes using wiki-links and let your system do the hard work of combining ideas.

### Your notes are based on Markdown and saved in plain text files. This means your data is easily accessible at all times (not locked up in a server) and it's highly portable (you can use any text editor). Your devices are kept in sync using CloudKit (fast and reliable Apple database).

### NotePlan also syncs with your iCloud Calendar and Reminders, so you have all the important information in one place, right when you need it.

## [[hypernote.io]] https://hypernote.io/HFaclp/ #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]] 
### auto-complete from wikidata

### semantic relations

## https://graph.global/ #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### prototype, like [[hypernote.io]]

### single, objective entities

### Open Source
#### https://github.com/w2g/w2g/blob/master/README.md#introduction

#### there already are several systems like Wikidata in existence today. Google has their own Knowledge Graph. Facebook has its Open Graph. And few of these systems are designed to allow a user to query across systems.

#### Most of these systems aren't open. That means, the data requires special privileged keys to access. Wikidata is open but it has notability policies which make it difficult for people to use it for anything other than the Wikidata community decides. The platform which runs Wikidata could be repurposed and white-labeled (in almost an identical fashion as w2g is trying to achieve), but the code-base is so sufficiently complex, that it seemed prudent to start with a simple, minimalist prototype that anyone could easily get up and running and adapt to their needs. Wikidata provides a bunch of functionality which is beyond the scope of the core value propositions w2g hopes to highlight, and I'd hate for its mission to be drowned out by Wikidata's added complexity.

#### Interoperability. To allow any website to connect to the Graph and resolve/render terms against semantic elements. This is done in a way which is very similar to wikidata's [qlabel](http://googleknowledge.github.io/qlabel).

#### Pub/sub scribe to tags and get notified when your (personal) entity is @mentioned.

#### [https://graph.global](https://graph.global/) is my pilot instance of w2G and I imagine it could work similarly to Wikipedia + Wikidata. Many interoperable w2gs may emerge and run in parallel which each serve unique community needs.

## https://twitter.com/Conaw/status/1283206638002823168

## #UI for [[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### #[[Twitter as model for [[exchange of ideas]]]]

### Schnelles Wischen - Swipe links & rechts

### Mobile first

### Titelzeile: Primärauswahl: Thema, Quelle etc.

### darunter zwei Streams: aktuelle eigene Ordnung und einzuordnendes (vielleicht relevant)
