---
title: January 17th, 2021
---

## #topic #UI #tag #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### Ein Begriff ist zu wenig für viele Themen, Themen sind semantische Verbindungen zwischen Konzepten

### Synonyme von Teilaspekten wichtig
#### Beispiel:
##### Thema = Projekt "tool for exchange of ideas"
###### {{[[table]] null}}
####### tool
######## for exchange of ideas
######### anonymous

####### software
######## for communication
######### with neuronal reputation

####### platform
######## for knowledge management
######### decentralized

###### falsch: Projekt ist eine Entität. Diese ist Zielpunkt von Relevanzbeziehungen
####### haben persönlich relevante Themen die Funktion von booleschen Google-Alerts?

####### Nur Projekte?

### nodes over and under nodes: Zusammenfassung über Zitat, Notiz/Gegenargument unter Zitat

## [Riverside.fm - Record Podcasts And Video Interviews From Anywhere](https://riverside.fm/) #tools #Podcast
### The easiest way to record podcasts and video

### interviews in studio quality from anywhere.

### All from the browser.

### The quality of the recording is not dependent on the internet connection.

### We upload your audio and video while you are recording, so when you hit stop you can download the recording within seconds.

### Computer crashed or you reloaded while recording? No problem. The recordings are saved automatically.

### Schedule and invite your guests with **one click**. Guests and producers join with **one click**.

### All from your Chrome browser on laptop or desktop.

### Livestream your interview to Facebook, Twitter, Youtube and Twitch simultaneously!

### competing: 
#### [The #1 Podcast Recording Software for Remote Interviews](https://squadcast.fm/)
##### Production and post-production is a breeze with intuitive software that eliminates audio drift and simplifies editing.

##### With the Teams feature, you can collaborate with multiple people at every phase of the podcasting workflow, from pre-production to post.

##### Your podcast is not a conference call. With Zoom, all audio is recorded over the internet and not at the source, causing your interview to sound robotic, which leads to listener fatigue.

##### Try SquadCast free for 7 days

#### zencaster, RINGR

## [LOOPY: a tool for thinking in systems](https://ncase.me/loopy/) #tools
### a tool to make interactive simulations

### you can model systems by simply drawing circles & arrows

## [Available .com Domains in 2020 - One Word Domains](https://www.oneword.domains/available-com-domains) #tools
### A collection of available one-word domains

## [Collect & Discover Website Bookmarks - Bunklist](https://bunklist.com/) #tools #[[exchange of ideas]]
### Bunklist is a social bookmarking platform to discover, create, and share website links with your friends through simple lists.

## [mymind — The extension for your mind](https://mymind.com/manifesto)
### No need to waste time categorizing or organizing.

### Your new mind does it for you, so you can immediately find what you need later.

### Our minds have been taken captive: By social approval systems, by newsfeeds and timelines, by advertisements and corporate agendas. Our information is scattered across platforms, bound by terms and conditions.

### We promise:
#### __⚘ No social features__

#### __⚘ No collaboration__

#### __⚘ No vanity metrics__

#### __⚘ No social pressure__⚘ No tracking

#### ⚘ No ads

#### ⚘ Always private

### 
