---
title: February 14th, 2021
---

## https://app.organizedly.io/ #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### tasks, bidirectional links, queries

### structured, less flexible [[Roam]]

## [[weighted relations]]
### instead of percentage use properties with ranking: very, little, maybe

### or use three different degree relations for each relation:
#### is relevant for
##### is very relevant for

##### is a little relevant for

##### may be relevant for

#### is very, a little, maybe synonym to
##### add "totally"?

##### same for "relevant for"?

## [Form.IO - A Form and Data Management Platform](https://www.form.io/)
### Form.io is an enterprise class combined form and API data management platform for developers who are building their own complex form-based business process applications. Our platform is used by companies all over the world, from startups, to SMBs, to large enterprises, who operate in a wide range of business verticals including healthcare, government, banking and finance, insurance, legal, online retail, compliance, multi-tenanted technology platforms, software development agencies, and many more.

## [Home | Earth 2](https://earth2.io/) #NFT
### Earth 2 is a futuristic concept for a second earth; a metaverse, between virtual and physical reality in which real-world geolocations on a sectioned map correspond to user generated digital virtual environments. These environments can be owned, bought, sold, and in the near future deeply customized.

### A virtual 1:1 scale version of Earth is inevitable and Earth 2 is the beginning of this exciting future. Phase 1 is now live and represents the central global body that aims to determine ownership of digital assets and property inside this futuristic virtual metaverse of Earth.

### Built on top of MapBox technology, we have created a geographically linked digital grid layer that spans across the entire planet allowing people to claim ownership of Virtual Land in the form of tiles. It is our vision that Virtual Land will increase in value over time based on demand, location and earning potential, much the same way that physical land does, so be sure to claim your own land in key locations around the world early on!

## [Nike now holds patent for blockchain-based sneakers called ‘CryptoKicks’](https://thenextweb.com/hardfork/2019/12/10/nike-blockchain-sneakers-cryptokick-patent/) #NFT
### Nike‘s patent for its blockchain-compatible sneakers dubbed “CrpytoKicks.”

### When you buy a pair of the “CryptoKicks,” you’ll also receive a digital asset attached to a unique identifier of that shoe. As a result, there is digital scarcity of the digital assets, as their production is effectively tied to the production of real sneakers.

### When sneakers are sold to someone else, ownership can be transferred by trading both real shoe and/or associated digital assets. These digital assets can be stored in what’s being called a “Digital Locker,”

### owners of “CryptoKicks” will be able to “intermingle or breed the digital shoe with another digital shoe to create ‘shoe offspring’ and have the offspring made as a new, tangible pair of shoes.”

## [People are making more than 500% buying property that doesn’t actually exist - MarketWatch](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/people-are-making-more-than-500-buying-property-that-doesnt-actually-exist-2018-09-04) #NFT
### “Decentraland is a [blockchain-based] virtual city where you will be able to visit for many reasons including business, retail, entertainment and also, of course, play games,”

### “VR is about to become mainstream and users will demand a world shielded from the agenda of a central organization.”

### Decentraland differs from other virtual cities like Second Life in that it is a centralized platform and is owned by its users, not a single entity, meaning it is not at the risk of the entity that owns and runs the platform.

### The most expensive LAND for sale at the moment is going for 1 billion MANA, or about $80 million.

### The property sold for just over $500 seven months ago, before being on-sold for a 340% profit two months later.

### According to Ordano, the Decentraland economy is worth around $20 million, which he said he hopes to see grow to a billion dollars.

### The platform is currently in alpha mode, meaning the only people who can access it are developers and LAND owners
