---
title: February 12th, 2021
---

## https://hackmd.io/c/tutorials #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### collaborative markdown, [[git]]-integriert

## #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### Killer-[[feature]]s:
#### unique entities to enable collaboration #[[named entity recognition]]

#### nudging relation-building instead of dumping everything in [[daily notes]]
##### relevance order instead of chronological order

#### [[UI]] optimized for quick sorting and linking

#### discover relevant content #[[neuronal reputation]]

### Projects
#### share-weighted version to be compared to individual version

#### share-weighted = fictional user as representative of project

#### topics in project to be treated differently, not shown outside of project

## [[named entity recognition]]
### [Named-entity recognition - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Named-entity_recognition)
#### State-of-the-art NER systems for English produce near-human performance. For example, the best system entering __MUC-7__ scored 93.39% of __F-measure__ while human annotators scored 97.60% and 96.95%.

#### Notable NER platforms include:
##### __GATE__ supports NER across many languages and domains out of the box, usable via a __graphical interface__ and a __Java__ API.
###### [GATE.ac.uk - index.html](https://gate.ac.uk/)
####### GATE is an __open source software toolkit__ capable of solving almost any text processing problem

####### Applications
######## __YODIE__ (Named Entity Disambiguation and Linking)

######## __BioYODIE__ (YODIE for biomedical text)

######## __Generic Sentiment Analysis Tool__

######## __TwitIE__ (Information Extraction for Tweets)

####### The 2 Minute Guide to Helping People Find Stuff with GATE
######## Take one large pile of text (documents, emails, tweets, patents, papers, transcripts, blogs, comments, acts of parliament, and so on and so forth) — call this your __corpus__.

######## Pick a structured description of interesting things in the text (a telephone directory, or chemical taxonomy, or something from the [Linked Data](http://linkeddata.org/) cloud) — call this your __ontology__.

######## Use [GATE Teamware](https://gate.ac.uk/teamware/) to mark up a __gold standard__ example set of annotations of the corpus (1.) relative to the ontology (2.).

######## Use [GATE Developer](https://gate.ac.uk/family/developer.html) to build a __semantic annotation pipeline__ to do the annotation job automatically and measure performance against the gold standard.

######## Take the pipeline from 4. and apply it to your text pile using [GATE Cloud](http://cloud.gate.ac.uk/) (or embed it in your own systems using [GATE Embedded](https://gate.ac.uk/family/embedded.html)).

######## Use [GATE Mimir](https://gate.ac.uk/mimir/) to store the annotations relative to the ontology in a __multiparadigm index server__. (For techies: this sits in the backroom as a RESTful web service.)

######## Use [Ontotext KIM](http://www.ontotext.com/kim/) to add semantic search, knowledge facet search, ontology browsing, entity popularity graphing, time series graphing, annotation structure search and (last but not least) boolean full text search. (More techy stuff: mash up these types of search with your existing UIs.)

##### __OpenNLP__ includes rule-based and statistical named-entity recognition.

##### __SpaCy__ features fast statistical NER as well as an open-source named-entity visualizer.

#### In the expression __named entity__, the word named restricts the task to those entities for which one or many strings, such as words or phrases, stands (fairly) consistently for some referent. This is closely related to __rigid designators__, as defined by __Kripke__,__[3]____[4]__ although in practice NER deals with many names and referents that are not philosophically "rigid".

#### two distinct problems: detection of names, and __classification__ of the names by the type of entity they refer to (e.g. person, organization, location and other__[7]__). The first phase is typically simplified to a segmentation problem: names are defined to be contiguous spans of tokens, with no nesting, so that "Bank of America" is a single name, disregarding the fact that inside this name, the substring "America" is itself a name. This segmentation problem is formally similar to __chunking__. The second phase requires choosing an __ontology__ by which to organize categories of things.

#### __BBN__ categories, proposed in 2002, is used for __question answering__ and consists of 29 types and 64 subtypes.__[9]__ Sekine's extended hierarchy, proposed in 2002, is made of 200 subtypes.__[10]__ More recently, in 2011 Ritter used a hierarchy based on common __Freebase__ entity types in ground-breaking experiments on NER over __social media__ text.

#### 

## https://transitivebullsh.it/nextjs-notion-starter-kit #tools for #Webpage
