---
title: January 28th, 2021
---

## https://mirror.xyz/ #[[tools for [[exchange of ideas]]]]
### It's a crypto-native Substack. You publish with your ENS name and content is stored on [[Arweave]]. In the future, they plan to let writers gate content with your token or another token.

## [Worksharing](https://inv.tech/worksharing) #tools for [[exchange of talent]]
### Worksharing is a blend of BPO, RPA, a talent marketplace, and an assistant service that feels like having an extension of yourself or your team.
#### The original conception of Invisible was as a kind of master-synthetic-assistant, like Jarvis. Or Alfred. The best way to think of us is as a process assistant. We're not going to call Verizon for you or pick up your dry cleaning. But if you need processes run on a regular basis, we're awesome.

#### The most satisfied clients identify 1-3 large processes that will use the bulk of their monthly subscription. Clients most often start with lead generation, data management, or large custom workflows.

#### our rollover policies give clients 3-6 months to use any existing budget

#### For $99 / month, we can put your account on "pause."

#### **Basic:** 250$/month
##### You like to document processes.

##### The volume of work you need done changes month to month.

#### **Professional:** 2000$/month
##### You can think of 1-3 standard business processes it's cumbersome to run on a regular basis.

#### **Custom:** $5000$/month
##### You can think of 1-3 standard business processes its cumbersome to run on a regular basis.

##### At least one of those processes is high volume and something you'd love help automating.

#### Customers use our worksharing service to enter data, clean data, enrich data, and run custom transformations on demand.

## [Organize paid crowdsourcing with shareable tasks | by Earn.com | news.earn.com](https://news.earn.com/organize-paid-crowdsourcing-with-social-tasks-98fb0713af6c) #tools for [[exchange of talent]]
### Deposit money to set up a URL with a microtask. Then email it, text it, or post it on social media.
#### You can also restrict shareable tasks to only be completed by members of particular lists, like the skilled Java programmers at __Earn.com/java__ or by the Bitcoin holders at __Earn.com/bitcoin__.

## [Mirror](https://mirror.finance/)  #tools for [[exchange of assets]
### Mirror Protocol allows the creation of fungible assets, “synthetics”, that track the price of real world assets. Mirror synthetics are intended to be used as key building blocks in smart contracts, and to bring the world’s assets to the blockchain.

### Mirror smart contracts are built on __Terra__ and __Cosmwasm__,

### and leverages TerraUSD as the collateral asset.

## #topic Wie lassen sich unterschiedliche Ansichten erzielen für "Bitcoin in seiner Relevanz für die Vermögensanlage" und "Bitcoin in seiner Relevanz für dezentrale Werkzeuge"?
### https://1729.com/11-articles-for-11-years-of-bitcoin-v2
#### Beispiel für [[exchange of ideas]] und [[exchange of talent]]

### durch #relation "ist nicht relevant für"

### 
