---
title: February 4th, 2021
---

## [Stacker](https://www.stackerhq.com/) #tools
### Stacker lets you create the digital tools you need to engage your customers, partners and company, all powered by the data in your Airtable or Google Sheets.

### Turn your spreadsheet into something that works like an app.

### You control exactly what your users can access, and what actions they can do.

### Make use of your data, and turn manual processes into automated ones.
#### Onboarding and application forms

#### Real-time comments and collaboration

#### Secure file upload

#### Customer and team dashboards

### A customizable CRM app based on your data. Manage customers, contacts, support tickets and meetings.

### Customer Account Portal: Let your customers self-serve to update their details, and track their orders.

### Field Worker App: Allow your mobile workforce to keep track of their worklists, look up data on the go, and submit invoices.

### Client Project Portal: Let your client to view ongoing projects, see status updates and upload documents.

## [Mem — The fastest way to capture and share information.](https://get.mem.ai/) #tools for [[exchange of ideas]]
### ⚡️ Lightning fast capture

### 🔍 Always-on search

### 🤝 Seamless collaboration

### As simple as Apple Notes — powered by a collaborative graph database.

### Something to read later? Add it to your Inbox. Snooze notifications until tomorrow morning or for 27 minutes.

### Fazit: nur timeline & inbox, gutes UI, aber wenig Neues

## https://query.wikidata.org/ for entity recognition #tools for #[[exchange of ideas]]

## #[[platform for [[exchange of ideas]]]]

## 
