---
title: Essential Scrum: a practical guide to the most popular agile process
---

## Metadata::
### Author(s):: [[Kenneth S. Rubin]]

### Type:: [[Book]]

### Topics:: [[Produktivität, Unternehmertum, Management]], [[Informatik]], [[_Exzerpte_Studium_Vorrat]]

### Date:: 2013

### Date added:: [[July 2nd, 2019]]

### Zotero links:: [Local library](zotero://select/library/items/8PR3IFZ3), [Web library](https://www.zotero.org/users/4111725/items/8PR3IFZ3), [Rubin_2013_Essential Scrum.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6)

### tag:: #[[Exzerpt]], #[[ZoteroImport]]

## Notes::
### **[[Yellow Annotations]] (14/07/2019, 21:16:57)**
#### "With an agile approach, you begin by creating a product backlog—a prioritized list of the features and other capabilities needed to develop a successful product. Guided by the product backlog, you always work on the most important or highest-priority items first." ([Rubin 2013:46](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=46))

#### "Typically the amount of work in the product backlog is much greater than can be completed by a team in one short-duration iteration. [...] At the end of the iteration, the team reviews the completed features with the stakeholders to get their feedback. Based on the feedback, the product owner and team can alter both what they plan to work on next and how the team plans to do the work. [...] At the end of each iteration, the team should have a potentially shippable product (or increment of the product), one that can be released if appropriate. If releasing after each iteration isn't appropriate, a set of features from multiple iterations can be released together." ([Rubin 2013:47](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=47))

#### "In 1993, Jeff Sutherland and his team at Easel Corporation created the Scrum process for use on a software development effort by combining concepts from the 1986 article with concepts from object-oriented development, empirical process control, iterative and incremental development, software process and productivity research, and complex adaptive systems. In 1995, Ken Schwaber published the first paper on Scrum [...]. I have worked with organizations that have successfully used Scrum for organizing and managing the work associated with hardware development, marketing programs, and sales initiatives." ([Rubin 2013:48](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=48))

#### "From an effort perspective, with Scrum development we required one-tenth the amount of effort (calculated in person-months) compared to our previous use of a plan-driven, waterfall-style approach to develop a comparable amount of product functionality. Equally important, the Scrum development progressed at seven times the velocity of the waterfall development, meaning that per unit of time, the Scrum development produced about seven times more valuable features than the waterfall development." ([Rubin 2013:49f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=49))

#### "pre-Scrum experience of building features that nobody wanted and delivering those features late and with poor quality." ([Rubin 2013:50](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=50))

#### "The Cynefin framework (Snowden and Boone 2007) is a sense-making framework that helps us understand the situation in which we have to operate and decide on a situation-appropriate approach. It defines and compares the characteristics of five different domains: simple, complicated, chaotic, complex, and a fifth domain, disorder, which occurs when you don't know which other domain you are in." ([Rubin 2013:51f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=51))

#### "I will use the Cynefin framework to discuss situations in which Scrum is and is not a good fit." ([Rubin 2013:52](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=52))

#### "When dealing with complex problems, things are more unpredictable than they are predictable. If there is a right answer, we will know it only with hindsight. This is the domain of emergence. We need to explore to learn about the problem, then inspect and adapt based on our learning. Working in complex domains requires creative and innovative approaches. Routine, cookie-cutter solutions simply don't apply. We need to create a safe-fail environment for experimentation so that we can discover important information. In this environment high levels of interaction and communication are essential. Innovative new-product development falls into this category as does enhancing existing products with innovative new features. Scrum is particularly well suited for operating in a complex domain. In such situations our ability to probe (explore), sense (inspect), and respond (adapt) is critical. [...] Complicated problems are the domain of good practices dominated by experts. There might be multiple right answers, but expert diagnosis is required to figure them out. Although Scrum can certainly work with these problems, it might not be the best solution. For example, a performance optimization effort that calls for adjusting parameters to find the best overall system performance would be better served by assembling experts and letting them assess the situation, investigate several options, and base their response on good practice. Much of day-to-day software maintenance (dealing with a flow of product support or defect issues) falls into this category. This is also where many of the tactical, quantitative approaches like Six Sigma are particularly well suited, although these tactical approaches can also apply with simple domains. [...] When dealing with simple problems, everyone can see cause and effect. Often the right answer is obvious and undisputed. This is the domain of legitimate best practices. There are known solutions. Once we assess the facts of our situation, we can determine the proper predefined solution to use. Scrum can be used for simple problems, but it may not be the most efficient tool for this type of problem. Using a process with a well-defined, repeatable set of steps that are known to solve the problem would be a better fit. For example, if we want to reproduce the same product over and over again, a well-defined assembly-line process would be a better fit than Scrum. Or deploying the same commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) product into the 100th customer environment might best be completed by repeating a well-defined and proven set of steps for installing and configuring the product." ([Rubin 2013:53](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=53))

#### "Chaotic problems require a rapid response. We are in a crisis and need to act immediately to prevent further harm and reestablish at least some order. For example, suppose a university published an article stating that our product has a flawed algorithm that is producing erroneous results. Our customers have made substantial business investments based on the results from our product, and they are filing lawsuits against us for large damages. Our lead algorithm designer is on holiday in the jungles of Borneo and can't be reached for two more weeks. Scrum is not the best solution here. We are not interested in prioritizing a backlog of work and determining what work to perform in the next iteration. We need the ability to act immediately and decisively to stem the bleeding. With chaotic problems, someone needs to take charge of the situation and act. [...] You are in the disorder domain when you don't know which of the other domains you are in. This is a dangerous place to be because you don't know how to make sense of your situation. In such cases, people tend to interpret and act according to their personal preference for action. In software development, many people are familiar with and therefore have a personal preference for phase-based, sequential approaches that work well in simple domains. [...] these tend to be a rather poor fit for much of software development. When you are in the disorder domain, the way out is to break down the situation into constituent parts and assign each to one of the other four domains. You are not trying to apply Scrum in the disorder domain; you are trying to get out of this domain. [...] Scrum is not well suited to highly interrupt-driven work. Say you run a customer support organization and you want to use Scrum to organize and manage your support activities. Your product backlog is populated on a continuous basis as you receive support requests via phone or email. At no point in time do you have a product backlog that extends very far into the future, and the content and order of your backlog could change frequently (perhaps hourly or every few minutes). In this situation, you will not be able to reliably plan iterations of a week or more because you won't know what the work will be that far into the future. And, even if you think you know the work, there is a very good likelihood that a high-priority support request will arrive and preempt any such forward-looking plans. In interrupt-driven environments you would be better off considering an alternative agile approach called Kanban." ([Rubin 2013:54](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=54))

#### "The sweet spots for Kanban are the software maintenance and support areas." ([Rubin 2013:55](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=55))

#### "The product owner has a vision of what he wants to create (the big cube). Because the cube can be large, through an activity called grooming it is broken down into a set of features that are collected into a prioritized list called the product backlog. [...] the development team must determine a subset of the product backlog items it believes it can complete—an activity called sprint planning." ([Rubin 2013:62](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=62))

#### "To acquire confidence that the development team has made a reasonable commitment, the team members create a second backlog during sprint planning, called the sprint backlog. The sprint backlog describes, through a set of detailed tasks, how the team plans to design, build, integrate, and test the selected subset of features from the product backlog during that particular sprint." ([Rubin 2013:63](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=63))

#### "Size equates to cost, and product owners need to know an item's cost to properly determine its priority. [...] In practice, many teams use a relative size measure such as story points or ideal days. A relative size measure expresses the overall size of an item in such a way that the absolute value is not considered, but the relative size of an item compared to other items is considered. [...] Sprints are timeboxed so they always have a fixed start and end date, and generally they should all be of the same duration. A new sprint immediately follows the completion of the previous sprint. As a rule we do not permit any goal-altering changes in scope or personnel during a sprint; however, business needs sometimes make adherence to this rule impossible." ([Rubin 2013:65](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=65))

#### "During sprint planning, the product owner and development team agree on a sprint goal that defines what the upcoming sprint is supposed to achieve." ([Rubin 2013:66](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=66))

#### "The development team then provides an [[size [[Stories]]]] (typically in hours) of the effort required to complete each task. [...] Most Scrum teams performing sprints of two weeks to a month in duration try to complete sprint planning in about four to eight hours." ([Rubin 2013:67](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=67))

#### "A common approach to performing the daily scrum has the ScrumMaster facilitating and each team member taking turns answering three questions for the benefit of the other team members:

#### What did I accomplish since the last daily scrum?
What do I plan to work on by the next daily scrum?
What are the obstacles or impediments that are preventing me from making progress?" ([Rubin 2013:69](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=69))


#### "refer to the sprint results as a potentially shippable product increment" ([Rubin 2013:70](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=70))

#### "when developing software, a bare-minimum definition of done should yield a complete slice of product functionality that is designed, built, integrated, tested, and documented. [...] "potentially shippable" does not mean that what got built must actually be shipped. Shipping is a business decision, which is frequently influenced by things such as "Do we have enough features or enough of a customer workflow to justify a customer deployment?" or "Can our customers absorb another change given that we just gave them a release two weeks ago?"" ([Rubin 2013:71](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=71))

#### "Plan-driven processes are so named because they attempt to plan for and anticipate up front all of the features a user might want in the end product, and to determine how best to build those features. [...] Plan-driven processes are often called sequential processes because practitioners perform, in sequence, a complete requirements analysis followed by a complete design followed in turn by coding/building and then testing." ([Rubin 2013:74](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=74))

#### "Plan-driven processes treat product development like manufacturing—they shun variability and encourage conformance to a defined process. [...] In product development, however, the goal is to create the unique single instance of the product, not to manufacture the product. This single instance is analogous to a unique recipe." ([Rubin 2013:77](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=77))

#### "In Scrum, we don't work on a phase at a time; we work on a feature at a time." ([Rubin 2013:79](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=79))

#### "If we make a mistake during analysis and find it during analysis, it is an inexpensive fix. If that same error is not found until design, we have to fix not only the incorrect requirement, but potentially parts of our design based on the wrong requirement. This compounding of the error continues through each subsequent phase, making what might have been a small error to correct during analysis into a much larger error to correct in testing or operations. To avoid late changes, sequential processes seek to carefully control and minimize any changing requirements or designs by improving the accuracy of the predictions about what the system needs to do or how it is supposed to do it. Unfortunately, being excessively predictive in early-activity phases often has the opposite effect. It not only fails to eliminate change; it actually contributes to deliveries that are late and over budget as well. [...] the desire to eliminate expensive change forces us to overinvest in each phase—doing more work than is necessary and practical. Second, we're forced to make decisions based on important assumptions early in the process, before we have validated these assumptions with feedback from our stakeholders based on our working assets. As a result, we produce a large inventory of work products based on these assumptions." ([Rubin 2013:86](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=86))

#### "When developing a product, the balance point should be set in an economically sensible way to maximize the amount of ongoing adaptation based on fast feedback and minimize the amount of up-front prediction, while still meeting compliance, regulatory, and/or corporate objectives." ([Rubin 2013:89](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=89))

#### "idle work is far more wasteful and economically damaging than idle workers. Idle work is work that we want to do (such as building or testing something) but can't do because something is preventing us. Perhaps we are blocked waiting on another team to do something, and until that team completes its work, we can't do ours. Or maybe we just have so much work to do that it can't all be done at once. [...] Many product development organizations focus more on eliminating the waste of idle workers than on the waste of idle work. For example, in traditional thinking, if I hire you to be a tester, I expect you to spend 100% of your time testing. If you spend less than 100% of your time testing, I incur waste (you're idle when you could be testing). To avoid this problem, I will find you more testing work to do—perhaps by assigning you to multiple projects—to get your utilization up to 100%. Unfortunately, this approach reduces one form of waste (idle-worker waste) while simultaneously increasing another form of waste (idle-work waste). And, most of the time, the cost of the idle work is far greater than the cost of an idle worker. [...] you don't win the relay gold medal by keeping the runners 100% busy. You win the gold medal by getting the baton across the finish line first. So, the important takeaway is "Watch the baton, not the runners"." ([Rubin 2013:96](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=96))

#### "in Scrum, we are acutely aware that finding the bottlenecks in the flow of work and focusing our efforts on eliminating them is a far more economically sensible activity than trying to keep everyone 100% busy." ([Rubin 2013:97](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=97))

#### "A side effect of Scrum's being value-centric is that very little emphasis is put on process-centric ceremonies. [...] Example ceremonies that might be unnecessary formality include the following:

#### A three-day, heavyweight process is required for approving and migrating code from the development environment to the QA environment before we are allowed to start testing.
All anomalies have to be logged into a software tool so that they can be tracked and reported, even if I could just tap on the shoulder of the person sitting next to me and say, "Hey, this isn't working; could you fix it?" and have him make a fix so I can continue my work.
I write a document because now is the prescribed time to write that document, even though nobody can say why that document is necessary or valuable.


#### In Scrum, our goal is to eliminate unnecessary formality." ([Rubin 2013:102](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=102))

#### "Sprints of the same duration provide us with cadence—a regular, predictable rhythm or heartbeat to a Scrum development effort. A steady, healthy heartbeat allows the Scrum team and the organization to acquire an important rhythmic familiarity with when things need to happen to achieve the fast, flexible flow of business value." ([Rubin 2013:112](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=112))

#### "makes the mundane but necessary activities habitual, thereby freeing up mental capacity to stay focused on the fun, value-added work." ([Rubin 2013:113](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=113))

#### "user stories [...] three Cs: card, conversation, and confirmation. [...] to specify a class of users (the user role), what that class of users wants to achieve (the goal), and why the users want to achieve the goal (the benefit)" ([Rubin 2013:128](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=128))

#### "The details of a requirement are exposed and communicated in a conversation among the development team, product owner, and stakeholders. The user story is simply a promise to have that conversation." ([Rubin 2013:129](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=129))

#### "user stories can and should be supplemented with whatever other written information helps provide clarity regarding what is desired. [...] also contains confirmation information in the form of conditions of satisfaction. These are acceptance criteria that clarify the desired behavior." ([Rubin 2013:130](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=130))

#### "epics are excellent placeholders for a large collection of more detailed stories to be created at an appropriate future time." ([Rubin 2013:131f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=131))

#### "The next-size stories [...] are those that are often on the order of weeks in size and therefore too big for a single sprint. Some teams might call these features. [...] Some teams also use the term theme to refer to a collection of related stories." ([Rubin 2013:132](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=132))

#### "The INVEST criteria are Independent, Negotiable, Valuable, Estimatable, Small (sized appropriately), and Testable. [...] user stories should be independent or at least only loosely coupled with one another. Stories that exhibit a high degree of interdependence complicate estimating, prioritizing, and planning." ([Rubin 2013:133](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=133))

#### "The details of stories should also be negotiable. Stories are not a written contract in the form of an up-front requirements document. Instead, stories are placeholders for the conversations where the details will be negotiated." ([Rubin 2013:134](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=134))

#### "Stories need to be valuable to a customer, user, or both." ([Rubin 2013:135](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=135))

#### "most technical stories [...] should not be included in the product backlog. Instead, these types of stories should be tasks associated with getting business-valuable stories done. If the development team has a strong definition of done, there should be no need to write stories like these, because the work is implied by the definition of being done. The crux of the valuable criteria is that all stories in the backlog must be valuable (worth investing in) from the product owner's perspective, which represents the customer and user perspectives. Not all stories are independent, and not all stories are fully negotiable, but they all must be valuable. [...] Estimates provide an indication of the size and therefore the effort and cost of the stories." ([Rubin 2013:136](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=136))

#### "If the team isn't able to size a story, the story is either just too big or ambiguous to be sized, or the team doesn't have enough knowledge to estimate a size. [...] Stories worked on in sprints should be small. If we're doing a several-week sprint, we want to work on several stories that are each a few days in size. If we have a two-week sprint, we don't want a two-week-size story, because the risk of not finishing the story is just too great. [...] Being testable means having good acceptance criteria (related to the conditions of satisfaction) associated with the story, which is the "confirmation" aspect of a user story." ([Rubin 2013:137](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=137))

#### "Nonfunctional requirements represent system-level constraints. [...] Each nonfunctional requirement is a prime target for inclusion in the team's definition of done. If the team includes the "Web Browser Support" nonfunctional requirement in the definition of done, the team will have to test any new features added in the sprint with all of the listed browsers. If it doesn't work with all of them, the story isn't done. [...] Sometimes we need to create a product backlog item that focuses on knowledge acquisition. [...] Such exploration is known by many names: prototype, proof of concept, experiment, study, spike, and so on. They are all basically exploration activities that involve buying information." ([Rubin 2013:138](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=138))

#### "Often I employ a user story as the placeholder for the exploration work [...]. The team might not be able to answer particular questions until an architectural decision has been made, but it must be able to answer the question of how much effort it wants to spend to buy the information necessary to make the architectural decision. So, we ask the team to size the prototyping story. [...] Imagine that I flip a coin. If it comes up heads, we'll do architecture A; if it comes up tails, we'll do architecture B. Now, I ask the team to estimate the cost of being wrong." ([Rubin 2013:139](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=139))

#### "What if the team's response to "What would it cost if we were wrong?" is $15K? In this case it would be a bad decision to do the prototyping story. Why spend $10K to buy information that has an expected value of $7.5K? [...] given today's ever-advancing technologies, this scenario is not as far-fetched as it may sound. It's an example of what some people call a fail-fast strategy [...] users are far better critics than they are authors." ([Rubin 2013:140](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=140))

#### "If it is the first workshop, I usually start by performing user role analysis. The goal is to determine the collection of user roles that can be used to populate the user role part of our stories [...]. The top-down approach involves the team starting with a large story (like an epic) and then concentrating its efforts on generating a reasonable collection of smaller stories associated with the epic. An alternative is to work more bottom-up and start immediately brainstorming stories that are associated with the next release of an existing system. [...] At the highest level are the epics, representing the large activities of measurable economic value to the user—for example, the "Buy a Product" epic. Next we think about the sequence or common workflow of user tasks that make up the epic (represented by themes—collections of related stories). We lay out the themes along a timeline, where themes in the workflow that would naturally occur sooner are positioned to the left of the ones that would occur later. For example, the "Search for Product" theme would be to the left of the "Manage Shopping Cart" theme." ([Rubin 2013:141](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=141))

#### "Each theme is then decomposed into a set of implementable stories that are arranged vertically in order of priority (really desirability because it is unlikely that the stories have been estimated yet and we can't really know final priority until we know cost). [...] Good story maps show a flow of activities from the users' perspective and provide a context for understanding individual stories and their relationship to larger units of customer value." ([Rubin 2013:142](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=142))

#### "Story maps provide a two-dimensional view of a product backlog" ([Rubin 2013:143](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=143))

#### "Good product backlogs [...] DEEP [...] Detailed appropriately, Emergent, Estimated, and Prioritized." ([Rubin 2013:146](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=146))

#### "Grooming the product backlog should ensure that items at the top of the backlog are ready to be moved into a sprint" ([Rubin 2013:153](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=153))

#### "Story points combine factors like complexity and physical size into one relative size measure." ([Rubin 2013:173](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=173))

#### "The rules of Planning Poker are as follows:

#### 1. 
The product owner selects a PBI to be estimated and reads the item to the team.
Development team members discuss the item and ask clarifying questions to the product owner, who answers the questions.
Each estimator privately selects a card representing his estimate.
Once each estimator has made a private selection, all private estimates are simultaneously exposed to all estimators.
If everyone selects the same card, we have consensus, and that consensus number becomes the PBI estimate.
If the estimates are not the same, the team members engage in a focused discussion to expose assumptions and misunderstandings. Typically we start by asking the high and low estimators to explain or justify their estimates.
After the discussion, we return to step 3 and repeat until consensus is reached." ([Rubin 2013:177f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=177))


#### "there are some in the agile community who believe that estimating PBIs is not worthwhile. The intense discussion of the PBIs fostered by Planning Poker, however, is incredibly valuable." ([Rubin 2013:178](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=178))

#### "Ward Cunningham was the first to write about the concept of technical debt (Cunningham 1992). He defined it as follows: Shipping first time code is like going into debt. A little debt speeds development so long as it is paid back promptly with a rewrite. ... The danger occurs when the debt is not repaid. Every minute spent on not-quite-right code counts as interest on that debt. Entire engineering organizations can be brought to a stand-still under the debt load of an unconsolidated implementation. ..." ([Rubin 2013:184](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=184))

#### "Nowadays, technical debt refers both to the shortcuts we purposely take and also to the many bad things that plague software systems. These include

#### Unfit (bad) design—a design that once made sense but no longer does, given important changes to the business or technologies we now use

#### Defects—known problems in the software that we haven't yet invested time in removing
Insufficient test coverage—areas where we know we should do more testing but don't
Excessive manual testing—testing by hand when we really should have automated tests
Poor integration and release management—performing these activities in a manner that is time-consuming and error-prone
Lack of platform experience—for example, we have mainframe applications written in COBOL but we don't have many experienced COBOL programmers around anymore" ([Rubin 2013:184f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=184))


#### "team member or business immaturity or process deficiencies that lead to sloppy design, poor engineering practices, and a lack of testing. This kind of debt can be eliminated through proper training, a good understanding of how to apply technical practices, and sound business decision making. Because of the irresponsible and frequently accidental nature of how this type of debt is generated, I refer to it as naive technical debt. [...] there is unavoidable technical debt, which is usually unpredictable and unpreventable. [...] The final type of technical debt is strategic technical debt." ([Rubin 2013:185](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=185))

#### "an organization might deliberately make a strategic decision to take shortcuts during product development to achieve an important short-term goal, such as getting a time-sensitive product into the marketplace. Also, for a capital-strapped organization that is at risk of running out of money before it can complete its product, getting a product with technical debt to market at a reduced initial development cost and then generating revenue to self-fund ongoing development may be the only way for the organization to avoid death before deployment." ([Rubin 2013:185](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=185))

#### "reducing testing will both increase debt and cause us to go slower, because problems will go undetected until later when it is much more time-consuming to fix them. [...] test-driven development (TDD)—where the developer writes and automates a small unit test before writing the small piece of code that will make the test pass" ([Rubin 2013:192](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=192))

#### "There are times when deliberately taking on technical debt with absolutely no plan to ever repay it might be the most economically sensible thing to do. A common example would be the development of a throwaway prototype that is created for knowledge-acquisition purposes" ([Rubin 2013:202](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=202))

#### "There is a Boy Scout rule: "Always leave the campground cleaner than you found it." If you find a mess on the ground, you clean it up regardless of who might have made the mess. You intentionally improve the environment for the next group of campers. [...] Following this rule, we try to always make our product design and implementation a little better, not a little worse, every time we touch it. When a development team member is working in an area of the product and sees a problem (happened-upon technical debt), she cleans up the problem." ([Rubin 2013:203](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=203))

#### "A Scrum team that has been working together for an extended period of time and has become highly proficient with Scrum might require less coaching than a new team made up of people who have never worked together and are new to Scrum. Although the ScrumMaster might need to spend less time with the team day to day as the team matures, the ScrumMaster role remains critical to the success of Scrum within the organization. Usually as the Scrum team's need for a ScrumMaster decreases, the need for the ScrumMaster to focus on broader organizational impediments and to be a change agent throughout the organization value chain increases. In most cases, the ScrumMaster role remains a significant commitment of time. In those cases where it's not a full-time commitment, some combination of roles may take place. [...] If capacity permits and a single person is both a talented ScrumMaster and development team member, that person may act in both roles. [...] If a ScrumMaster truly has available capacity, in many cases my preference is to have that person be the ScrumMaster for more than one Scrum team" ([Rubin 2013:237](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=237))

#### "one combination of roles that is highly discouraged is having the same person serve as both ScrumMaster and product owner. The ScrumMaster is the coach of the Scrum team, which means the ScrumMaster is the Scrum coach for the product owner. It is hard to be your own coach. In addition, the product owner has real product authority and can make demands on the team. The ScrumMaster frequently acts as the balancing agent between the demands of the product owner and the needs and abilities of the development team." ([Rubin 2013:238](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=238))

#### "A release train is an approach to aligning the vision, planning, and interdependencies of many teams by providing cross-team synchronization based on a common cadence. [...] the release train always departs on time and waits for no one. Likewise, if a team misses the train, it need not fret because there will be another train departing at a known time in the future." ([Rubin 2013:265](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=265))

#### "Frequent, periodic planning and release (or potentially shippable increment—PSI) dates for the solution are fixed (dates are fixed, quality is fixed, scope is variable). [...] Release increments (PSIs) are available at regular (typically 60- to 120-day) intervals for customer preview, internal review, and system-level QA." ([Rubin 2013:265](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=265))

#### "The final outflow strategy is to wait for a complete Scrum team to be available before starting to work on a product. Organizations that violate the "Focus on idle work, not idle workers" principle frequently start working on a product when only a couple of people are available. [...] This is a flawed strategy because it will cause even more work to get blocked on other products, slowing down all product delivery and generating significant delay costs." ([Rubin 2013:327](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=327))

#### "Because the unit of capacity in Scrum is the team, we shouldn't start working on a product if we don't have a complete Scrum team." ([Rubin 2013:328](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=328))

#### "need for a buffer. Let's say a team is doing a two-week (ten-day) sprint. Right away, we must accept that the team doesn't actually have ten days to dedicate to sprint execution. We know, for instance, that on a two-week sprint about a day of that time needs to be reserved collectively for sprint-planning, sprint review, and sprint retrospective activities. We also know that the team should reserve up to 10% of its time to assist the product owner with product backlog grooming (writing and refining, estimating, and prioritizing product backlog items) to help ensure that the items are ready." ([Rubin 2013:385f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=385))

#### "For example, let's say our team's average velocity is 40 story points during a two-week sprint. The sprint we are planning, however, occurs during the last two weeks in December in the United States, which means many of our team members will be taking time off for the holidays. We would take on too much work if we used the average velocity of 40; we'd be better off assuming that a velocity closer to 20 (or thereabouts) is a more realistic capacity for the team during this sprint." ([Rubin 2013:387](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=387))

#### "swarming, where team members with available capacity gather to work on an item to finish what has already been started before moving ahead to start work on new items. Teams with a Musketeer attitude and some degree of T-shaped skills swarm. Teams that still think in terms of individual roles wind up with some members far ahead and others who are mired in unfinished work." ([Rubin 2013:396](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S6GGWLW6?page=396))
