---
title: Mises MEM Lviv
---

## Mises MEM (Museum for Entrepreneurship and Money) Lviv
### A dynamic meeting place in Lviv at the birthplace of Ludwig von Mises, the Jewish-Old-Austrian economist and most important mastermind of the theory of money and entrepreneurship: Not a museum with dusty exhibits, but a place where the dynamics of a market economy, peaceful cooperation across all borders, and the future of value creation can be felt and experienced. A completely new museum concept focuses on two aspects:

## "MEMORIAL": History of cooperation and coercion - a forgotten heyday of peaceful cooperation and totalitarianism as a historical warning
### The rich heritage of the golden age of a multicultural Lviv symbolizes the cultural flourishing of a united but decentralized Central Europe in which people of the most diverse ethnicities and religions peacefully traded, researched and built value in urban space for a long time. However, the past must not only be romanticized, but we must also learn from it. Socialism, nationalism and anti-Semitism have ravaged Lviv in particular. These bitter experiences can be an instructive legacy if they are confronted seriously and openly. In the atmosphere of a salon, a place of peaceful civic exchange, history is brought to life by an extensive digital library. Visitors can learn from the past according to their own interests and at their own pace - comfortably or intensively - using selected digital and analogue infographics, excerpts, articles, books, videos, sound documents and at a later stage virtual reality experiences from the past.

## "MEME": Future of creation - decentralized entrepreneurship, crypto currencies, digitalization
### At the centre of Mises MEM Lviv is the future as active creation. Ludwig von Mises and the development of Lviv offer ideal inspiration for practical entrepreneurship, the right and sustainable use of money, the realization of individual freedom and mastering the challenges of digitalization. Interactive state-of-the-art simulations make it possible to directly experience the dynamics of markets. A network of mentors helps you take your own steps in entrepreneurship, investment and digital competence. For the first time, the new field of crypto currencies will be didactically made comprehensible for everyone at a real location - with practical experiences. The best digital tools are prepared at workstations. There is an ongoing program of courses and workshops. The Mises MEM Lviv is thus also an innovative combination of a co-learning and a co-working space, where the pioneers of the future meet to learn from each other and create something new together. A separate room offers a playful learning experience about money and markets for children  and, at the same time, childcare for parents visiting the Mises MEM Lviv.

## The importance of Ludwig von Mises
### Ludwig von Mises was one of the most important theoretical opponents of socialism and National Socialism. The socialist Oskar Lange once suggested that a statue should be dedicated to Mises in every socialist state, because his well-founded and objective criticism was the only one that was taken seriously by socialists. The National Socialists put him at the top of their list of enemies: On the eve of the "Anschluss" of Austria, his apartment in Vienna was plundered, whose writings the Soviets plundered again - and kept under lock and key until the end. Only after the end of the Soviet Union were these writings discovered in an archive. Ludwig von Mises prevented a catastrophic famine in Vienna by persuading the socialist Otto Bauer to distance himself from Bolshevism. The importance of Mises remained great even later, but always in the background. He was probably the most important economic inspiration for the German economic miracle under Ludwig Erhard - through the economists Adolf Weber and Wilhelm Röpke, who were friends with Mises and close to Erhard, as well as through the effect of his work "Socialism". Later, Ludwig von Mises was instrumental in the rediscovery of the Austrian School of Economics in the USA. Today the memory of Ludwig von Mises could unleash a Ukrainian economic miracle - the potential of this young and culturally rich country is enormous. Ludwig von Mises had written his first academic paper on the subservience of the Ukrainian agricultural workers of Galicia in order to point the way to a freer future. The Ukrainian soil could prove to be the most fertile in Europe in every respect. The Mises LEM Lviv should contribute the spiritual seed for it.

### Mises’s main contributions are in the field of catallactics - the science to understand the spontaneous order emerging out of the exchange of ideas, talents and capital. It is this unplanned order that enables exponential innovation and true progress. Within this discipline, Mises has turned out to become the most important thinker on entrepreneurship and money of the 20th century, two complex phenomona usually ignored by mainstream economics, which focuses more on aggregates and less on dynamics. Mises’s insights in entrepreneurial and monetary theory were taken up by his student F.A von Hayek who would later become a Nobel laureate and inspired innovative projects like Wikipedia and Bitcoin. Lviv-born Mises is one of the intellectual fathers of the modern miracle of dynamic high-tech entrepreneurship, thus Lviv may be considered the intellectual birthplace of the Silicon valley in the US, the crypto valley in Switzerland and hubs of world trade like Singapur and Hongkong.
