---
title: The anatomy of violence: the biological roots of crime
---

## Metadata::
### Author(s):: [[Adrian Raine]]

### Type:: [[Book]]

### Abstract::
#### "Why do some kids from good environments become mass murderers? Is there actually such a thing as a natural-born killer? And, if so, what can we do to identify and treat those born with a predisposition to criminal behavior? For more than three decades Adrian Raine has sought answers to these questions through his pioneering research on the biological basis for violence. In this book, he presents the growing body of evidence that shows how genetics and environmental influences can conspire to create a criminal brain, and how something as seemingly innocent as a low resting heart rate can give rise to a violent personality. Bristling with ingenious experiments, surprising data, and shocking case studies, this is also a clear-eyed inquiry into the thorny ethical issues this science raises about prevention and punishment. Passionate, courageous, and at times controversial, The Anatomy of Violence is a groundbreaking work that will challenge your core human values and perspectives on violence."--Page 4 of cover.

### Topics:: [[Psychologie & Neurowissenschaft]], [[_Leseliste Philipp]], [[_Exzerpte_Studium_geplant]], [[Gewalt]]

### Date:: 2014

### Date added:: [[September 3rd, 2018]]

### Citekey:: raine_anatomyviolencebiological_2014

### Zotero links:: [Local library](zotero://select/library/items/38RI4UXW), [Web library](https://www.zotero.org/users/4111725/items/38RI4UXW), [Raine - 2014 - The anatom....pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP)

### tag:: #[[Exzerpt]], #[[Empfehlung]], #[[_tablet]], #[[ZoteroImport]]

## Notes::
### **[[Yellow Annotations]] (30/05/2019, 08:18:49)**
#### "Biological research on violence was vilified in the 1970s and 1980s, during my formative years as a scientist. Amid interdisciplinary rivalries the perception was that researchers like me were at best biological determinists who ignored social processes—and at worst racist eugenicists." ([Raine 2014:9](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=9))

#### "The heavy emphasis on an exclusively social approach to crime and violence throughout the last century did nothing to turn the rising tide of this perennial problem. It is widely acknowledged in criminology that as crime went up throughout the 1970s and 1980s our society largely gave up on the rehabilitation of inmates." ([Raine 2014:18](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=18))
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:d61ed68b-ec39-4d46-bdd8-44726101f17a
:END:

#### "[[Cesare Lombroso]], a former Italian army medic, was working as a psychiatrist and prison doctor at an asylum for the criminally insane in the town of Pesaro. [...] He detected an unusual indentation at its base, which he interpreted as reflecting a smaller cerebellum—or "little brain"—seated under the two larger hemispheres of the brain. 

#### From this singular and almost ghoulish observation, Lombroso went on to become the founding father of criminology [...]. Lombroso's theory had two pivotal points: that there was a basis to crime originating in the brain, and that criminals were an evolutionary throwback to more primitive species. Criminals, Lombroso believed, could be identified on the basis of "atavistic stigmata"—physical characteristics from more primitive stages of human evolution, such as a large jaw, a sloping forehead, and a single palmar crease." ([Raine 2014:21](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=21))
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:a95aebe9-ce7a-460c-a0d0-a7f91f1557d6
:END:

#### "hierarchy that placed Jews and Northern Italians at the top and Southern Italians (including Villella), along with Bolivians and Peruvians, at the bottom. Perhaps not coincidentally, at the time there was much higher crime in the poorer, more agricultural south of Italy, one of the many symptoms of the "southern problem" besetting the recently unified nation. [...] Lombroso was a famous, well-meaning intellectual, as well as a staunch supporter of the Italian Socialist Party. He wished to employ his research to serve the public good. He abhorred retribution and instead placed the emphasis of punishment on the protection of society. [...] Lombroso himself was Jewish" ([Raine 2014:22](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=22))

#### "why are people more than a hundred times more likely to be murdered on the day they are born than to be murdered on an average day in their life? Why are they fifty times more likely to be murdered by their stepfather than by their natural father?" ([Raine 2014:23](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=23))

#### "From rape to robbery and even to theft, evolution has made violence and antisocial behavior a profitable way of life for a small minority of the population." ([Raine 2014:24](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=24))

#### "When comparing, for instance, the cultures of the !Kung Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert in Southern Africa and the Mundurucú villagers in the Amazon Basin, anthropologists have found that the strikingly different environments they inhabit correlate with altruistic and antisocial behavior, respectively. The !Kung Bushmen live in a relatively inhospitable desert environment. Due to the extremely difficult living conditions, cooperation is prized. Men need to hunt together in search of food, and game is shared in the camp. There is also a high degree of parental investment in children, who are highly supervised and weaned gradually. Because of that high parental investment, fertility is relatively low. A disruption of a pair bond by either partner could have fatal consequences for the offspring, who are highly dependent on parental care. The personal characteristics adapted to the !Kung's environment are good hunting skills, reliable reciprocation of altruistic acts, the careful choosing of mates, and high parental investment in offspring. This personality profile is clearly more aligned to altruism than to cheating, a trait that is argued to be in part an adaptation to an inhospitable environment. In contrast, the Mundurucú are low-intensity tropical gardeners living in a relatively rich ecological niche along the Tapajós and Trombetas Rivers in the Amazon basin. Everything grows there, and life is relatively easy. In an interesting role-reversal, women carry out most of the food production. This environment makes for a very different way of life and a different male personality profile. The relatively greater availability of food frees males to engage in male-male competitive interactions centered around politics, planning raids and warfare, gossiping, fighting, and elaborate ritual ceremonies. Occasionally they engage in hunting game that they trade for sex with the village women. Men sleep together in a house separate from the women, whom they hold in disdain. Indeed, females are viewed as sources of pollution and danger. Males in the Gainj tribe, low-intensity gardeners in the highlands of New Guinea, also view sexual contact with women as dangerous, especially during menstruation. In contrast to the !Kung, Mundurucú mothers provide little care to their infants once they are weaned, and these children must quickly learn to fend for themselves. Mundurucú men play a minimal role in caring for their offspring. Personal characteristics of the successful Mundurucú male in this competitive society consist of good verbal skills for political oratory, fearlessness, skill at fighting and carrying out raids, bluff and bravado to avoid the risk of battle, and the ability to manipulate and deceive prospective mates on what resources he can offer to maximize offspring. Furthermore, he should not be gullible, since belief in the folklore regarding the dangers of sex and women as a source of pollution would not foster the passing on of one's genes. Similarly, for females living in a social context of low parental investment, those who can manipulate their menfolk by deception over an offspring's paternity, exaggeration of requirements, and resistance to the development of monogamous bonds are the most successful. The Mundurucú's way of life is then more associated with a cheating, antisocial strategy than with reciprocal altruism." ([Raine 2014:28f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=28))

#### "The nature of the Mundurucú's social environment clearly favors the expression of aggressive, psychopathic-like behavior. Certainly when one considers the fact that the Mundurucú were in the past fiercely aggressive headhunters, this parallel to psychopathy becomes clearer. Intriguingly, many of the features of the Mundurucú have parallels with features of psychopathic behavior in modern industrialized societies. For example, psychopaths show lack of conscience, superficial charm, high verbal skills, promiscuity, and lack of long-term interpersonal bonds." ([Raine 2014:30](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=30))

#### "The Yanomamo Indians in the tropical rain forests of northern Brazil and southern Venezuela provide another parallel culture to the Mundurucú. […] They'll break rules when it's in their interest. They participate in the forcible appropriation of women. They call themselves waiteri—meaning "fierce." And they are indeed both fearless and highly aggressive. Boys are socialized into acts of aggression from a surprisingly young age, with their "play" consisting of throwing spears and shooting arrows at other boys. Initially they are scared by this initiation into violence, but soon they come to revel in the adrenaline rush that the mock battles provide." ([Raine 2014:30f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=30))

#### "44 percent of all Yanomamo men over the age of twenty-five have killed someone, thus achieving the status of being a unokai. Some kill more than once, and one unokai had killed sixteen times. The source of the killing in the majority of cases is sexual jealousy—exactly what you'd expect from an evolutionary perspective and a species whose females make the greater parental investment. [...] The unokais have an average of 4.91 children compared with an average of 1.59 children for non-killers. [...] planned violence and the lack of remorse over killing others have been rewarded in the unokais' society. These are precisely the features of Western psychopaths." ([Raine 2014:31](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=31))

#### "In England, only 1 percent of babies live with a stepparent, and yet 53 percent of all baby killings are perpetrated by a stepparent. Data from the United States show a similar pattern—a child is a hundred times more likely to be killed as a result of abuse by a stepparent than by a genetically related parent." ([Raine 2014:33](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=33))

#### "This was estimated in one study of 405 women aged twelve to forty-five who had suffered penile-vaginal rape. The total base rate was 6.42 percent, which was twice as high as the 3.1 percent base rate for unprotected penile-vaginal intercourse in consensual couples. After correction for the use of contraceptives, the pregnancy base rate from rapes was estimated at 7.98 percent. The rates of pregnancies from rape can only be estimates because paternity is not investigated with definitive DNA evidence. Some women could "invent" a rape as a cover-up for an unwanted pregnancy. However, other studies have also reported higher rape-pregnancy rates than consensual-sex-pregnancy rates. It is nevertheless surprising. If we accept the findings, why would rape be more likely to result in a pregnancy? One conceivable hypothesis is that rapists are more likely to inseminate fertile women. Rapists select their victims" ([Raine 2014:38](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=38))

#### "research reports document that physiological arousal and lubrication occurs in 21 percent of all cases. Why would that happen? Because in half the cases, the date-raped woman was actually attracted to the perpetrator before the act. [...] sperm retention is increased by only approximately 5 percent with orgasm." ([Raine 2014:39](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=39))

#### "Between 10 percent and 26 percent of women report being raped during their marriage. [...] While men find the sexual infidelity most distressing, women in contrast find the emotional infidelity most distressing." ([Raine 2014:41](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=41))

#### "When it comes to same-sex homicides, data from twenty studies show that 97 percent of the perpetrators are male. [...] The simple evolutionary explanation is that women are worth fighting for. They are the valuable resource that men want to get their hands on. [...] Evolutionary theory argues that poorer people kill because they are lacking resources, an argument shared in common with sociological perspectives. [...] sex differences in aggression are in place as early as seventeen months of age. Boys are toddler warriors." ([Raine 2014:43](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=43))

#### "violence increases throughout the teenage years to peak at age nineteen. [...] women consistently rate the dangerousness of an aggressive, provocative encounter higher than men do. Women are also more fearful than men of situations and contexts that can involve bodily injury. They are more likely to develop phobias of animals and medical and dental procedures. While they are more averse to physically risky forms of sensation-seeking, they are not averse to seeking forms of stimulation that do not involve physical risk—things like novel experiences through music, art, and travel. Women also have a much greater concern over health issues than men. They rate health as more important and also go to the doctor more often." ([Raine 2014:44](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=44))

#### "the sex difference in aggression is highest at the most severe levels of physical aggression, is much lower when it comes to verbal aggression, and is negligible with "indirect aggression." Essentially, females are much more likely to engage in aggression when the cost to them in terms of physical injury is minimal." ([Raine 2014:44f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=44))

#### "So rather than being physically violent, women take a more passive-aggressive strategy. [...] Women attempt to ruin their rivals' reputation by saying they have a lot of boyfriends, sleep around a lot, and are sexually promiscuous." ([Raine 2014:45](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=45))

#### "This fascinating natural experiment—in which a baby with a violent heritage was transferred from a life of poverty and squalor into a loving, caring, successful family, yet still became a killer—suggests that there really is a genetic predisposition to violence." ([Raine 2014:48](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=48))

#### "identical twins are not absolutely 100 percent genetically identical, but are 99 percent identical in that remaining 1 percent of genetic variation that differentiates all of us. [...] 40 to 50 percent of the variability among us in antisocial behavior is explained by genetics." ([Raine 2014:50](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=50))

#### "Our findings became even more dramatic when we combined our different measures of antisocial behavior. No measure is perfectly reliable. You know how parents, teachers, and kids can disagree on things. How can we derive a more reliable measure of antisocial behavior? By averaging the three informant sources to get a "common view" of what the child really does. When we did that, we found that 96 percent of the variance in this combined view of antisocial behavior is heritable. There is no contribution at all from the shared environment, and only a 4 percent contribution from the non-shared environment. Once we have a more reliable measure of antisocial behavior the genetic influence goes way up. [...] Nonaggressive antisocial behavior was 48 percent heritable, while aggressive behavior was 65 percent heritable. Yet again, shared environmental influences were small for nonaggressive antisocial behavior (18 percent) and minimal for aggressive behavior (5 percent)." ([Raine 2014:51](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=51))

#### "the familial home influences accounted for on average 22 percent of the total variance in antisocial behavior. In contrast, environmental influences outside the family accounted for 33 percent of the variance." ([Raine 2014:53](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=53))

#### "Tom Bouchard, a leading behavioral geneticist at the University of Minnesota, has argued that shared environmental influences on adult personality are almost zero." ([Raine 2014:53f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=53))

#### "Han Brunner was a doctor in the University Hospital in Nijmegen in the Netherlands who was approached one day in 1978 by a woman wanting genetic counseling. Many of her male relatives seemed to have significant behavior problems. The problem was in their eyes, she said—it was the way they looked at you, frightening and aggressive. [...] These males had a defective gene—the MAOA gene, which normally produces the enzyme monoamine oxidase A. He sequenced this gene, analyzed it in detail, and found a mutation in it that resulted in no functional MAOA at all. [...] MAOA is an enzyme that metabolizes several neurotransmitters involved in impulse control, attention, and other cognitive functions, including dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. Mutations in the normal MAOA gene lead to deficient production of the MAOA enzyme." ([Raine 2014:60](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=60))

#### "A total lack of MAOA has profound effects. It disrupts the normal function of other neurotransmitters, resulting in a wide range of disorders—including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, alcoholism, drug abuse, impulsivity, and other risky behaviors. Han Brunner also found that the lack of MAOA in his affected family members resulted in lower IQ." ([Raine 2014:60f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=60))

#### "mice with deletion of the MAOA gene had become ferociously aggressive and were attacking other mice." ([Raine 2014:61](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=61))

#### "About 30 percent of us have a variation in the MAOA gene that gives rise to relatively low levels of this enzyme, resulting in disturbances in neurotransmitter levels. [...] What they found was that low levels of MAOA were associated with later antisocial and violent behavior, particularly when the children had been severely abused." ([Raine 2014:62](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=62))

#### "Men with a rarer genetic abnormality of the MAOA gene that results in excessively low levels of MAOA have twice the level of serious delinquency and adult violence of normal controls. [...] Researchers reported that the Maori had twice the level of the genotype conferring low levels of MAOA compared with Caucasians in New Zealand." ([Raine 2014:63](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=63))

#### "While the base rate of the low-MAOA gene is about 34 percent in Caucasian males and 56 percent in the Maori, it is 77 percent in Chinese males." ([Raine 2014:64](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=64))

#### "students with the low-MAOA gene not only had more aggressive personalities, but showed greater interpersonal hypersensitivity—their feelings were more easily hurt. They also showed a greater brain response to being socially excluded [...]. The 5HTT gene, the DRD2 gene, the DAT1 gene, and the DRD4 have all appeared on the gene landscape as linked to antisocial and aggressive behavior. What do these particular genes do? They regulate two important neurotransmitters in the brain—serotonin and dopamine." ([Raine 2014:65](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=65))

#### "When dopamine is experimentally increased in animals it fuels aggression, while blocking dopamine decreases aggression. [...] The serotonin-transporter gene is one of the most intensively researched genes in my fields of psychology, psychiatry, and neuroscience. There are two versions of this gene—the short-allele version and the long-allele version. About 16 percent of us have the short-allele version. This version makes our brains overrespond to emotional stimuli and can result in us letting off steam when we get overheated. [...] Resting levels of serotonin explained a full 85 percent of the variation in the incidents of aggression in the lives of these military men. [...] Subsequent studies have shown that the relationship between aggression and low serotonin levels is not as strong as originally thought—it explains more like 10 percent of the variation in aggression" ([Raine 2014:66](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=66))

#### "Serotonin is a mood stabilizer, which has an inhibitory function in the brain. It is thought to be one of the biological brakes on impulsive, thoughtless behavior. It innervates—or lubricates—a part of the brain called the frontal cortex," ([Raine 2014:67](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=67))

#### "the dopamine transporter DAT1 gene, which is linked to violence, is also associated with the number of sexual partners you have." ([Raine 2014:68](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=68))

#### "The murderer, on the right, shows strong activation in the occipital cortex, just like the normal control. There's nothing wrong with his visual system. In stark contrast to the normal control, however, the murderer shows a striking lack of activation in the prefrontal cortex. Overall, the forty-one murderers showed a significant reduction in prefrontal glucose metabolism compared with the controls." ([Raine 2014:77](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=77))

#### "Our study constituted the first brain-imaging evidence to show that the brains of a large sample of murderers are functionally different from those of the general population." ([Raine 2014:78](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=78))

#### "We cannot use brain imaging as a high-tech tool to tell who's normal, who's a one-off killer, and who's a serial killer. It's just not that simple. Yet at the same time we are beginning to gain important clues as to which brain regions—when dysfunctional—could give rise to violence." ([Raine 2014:85f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=85))

#### "important distinction in violence research—between "proactive" and "reactive" aggression." ([Raine 2014:86](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=86))

#### "the amygdala fires up our emotions and stimulates both predatory and affective attack. The hippocampus modulates and regulates aggression and when stimulated sets in motion predatory attack. The thalamus is a relay station between the emotional limbic areas and the regulatory cortical areas. The midbrain when stoked up gives expression to full-blooded affective emotional aggression. [...] We found that both murderer groups showed higher activation of these subcortical limbic regions than the controls, especially in the more "emotional" right hemisphere of the brain." ([Raine 2014:88](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=88))

#### "cold-blooded killers have sufficient prefrontal regulatory resources to act out their aggression in a relatively careful and premeditated fashion. They feel as angry as anyone, but instead of getting mad, they get even." ([Raine 2014:89](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=89))

#### "reduced hippocampal functioning to be associated with higher psychopathy scores in violent offenders." ([Raine 2014:91](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=91))

#### "The hippocampus is critical for learning and memory. It's one of the first areas to go in people with Alzheimer's disease. [...] Boys who had been persistently antisocial from the age of six to sixteen as rated by their parents and teachers did more poorly on these hippocampal memory tasks than controls. [...] the hippocampus plays a role in fear conditioning [...] the posterior cingulate, lying more toward the rear of the head and deep inside the middle of the brain. This region has been found to be poorly functioning in adult criminal psychopaths, conduct-disordered boys, and aggressive patients. Because this brain region is also important in the recall of emotional memories and the experiencing of emotions, a disturbance to this area will likely result in a disturbance in emotion, including causing anger." ([Raine 2014:92](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=92))

#### "lurking beneath that civilized façade lies the cruel visage of domestic violence. I did a survey of 622 Hong Kong undergraduate students. They were not all rich kids by any means, but they were largely from the privileged classes. […] Sixty-two percent had parents who would insult or swear at them, 65 percent had parents who would do or say something just to spite them, while 48 percent were slapped or spanked. […] Fifty-one percent went on to admit that their parents would hit them with an object. Forty percent were physically beaten. Six percent had actually been choked, while 5 percent had been deliberately burned or scalded. Seven percent had even been threatened with a knife or gun." ([Raine 2014:93f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=93))

#### "spouse-abusers were strongly characterized by reactive aggression [...] the spouse-abusers were slower in responding to emotional words. Negative emotional stimuli were capturing their attention much more than normal. [...] spouse-abusers showed much greater activation of the emotional amygdala to negative-emotion words, together with less activation in the regulatory prefrontal cortex." ([Raine 2014:95](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=95))

#### "Historically, the prevailing clinical perspective has been that spousal abuse is a conscious, deliberate, and premeditated use of power to subjugate and control the female partner for selfish instrumental gain. […] traditional treatment programs to treat spouse-abusers based on the feminist perspective simply do not work." ([Raine 2014:96f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=97))

#### "lying was consistently associated with increased activation in the prefrontal cortex as well as areas of the parietal cortex." ([Raine 2014:98](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=98))

#### "By combining brain-imaging methodology with machine learning [...] Dan Langleben and Ruben Gur, at the University of Pennsylvania, have been demonstrating accuracy rates upward of 88 percent in detecting deception." ([Raine 2014:99](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=99))

#### "Josh Greene, an amazing philosopher and neuroscientist at Harvard, published the first study to describe what happens at a neural level during personal moral dilemmas like this. Compared to more "impersonal" moral dilemmas that do not bring you face-to-face with someone else, your brain shows increased activation in a circuit that comprises the medial prefrontal cortex, the angular gyrus, the posterior cingulate, and the amygdala. This makes sense, as these brain areas contribute to complex thinking, and the ability to step outside of yourself and evaluate the bigger social picture." ([Raine 2014:100](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=100))

#### "the nervous system of some offenders is simply not as "nervous" as the rest of ours. It confers on them a fearless, risk-taking, conscience-free personality [...]. They are biologically different from us. At the heart of this autonomic predisposition to violence [...] is the heart itself." ([Raine 2014:111](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=111))

#### "a low resting heart rate. Some people kill in such a manner that we call them cold-blooded killers" ([Raine 2014:112](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=112))

#### "Rabbits who are aggressive and dominant indeed have lower resting heart rates than subordinate, nonaggressive rabbits. Furthermore, when dominance in these rabbits is experimentally manipulated, heart rate goes down as dominance goes up. The same relationships have been found throughout the animal kingdom in macaques, baboons, tree shrews, and mice." ([Raine 2014:112f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=112))

#### "resting heart rate explained about 5 percent of the differences between subjects in antisocial behavior. [...] It's much stronger than the relationship between smoking and lung cancer, or the effectiveness of taking aspirin to reduce the risk of death from a heart attack" ([Raine 2014:113](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=113))

#### "resting heart rate during a stressor, this seemingly innocuous biomarker suddenly explains 12 percent of the variation that exists among us in antisocial behavior. This is as strong as the ability of mammograms to detect breast cancer, the accuracy of home pregnancy test kits, and success of sleeping pills in improving chronic insomnia. [...] heart rate may partly explain the gender differences in antisocial behavior. [...] The sex difference in heart rate is in place as early as age three, with boys having a heart rate that is 6.1 beats a minute lower than girls." ([Raine 2014:114](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=114))

#### "out of forty-eight predictors (family, socioeconomic position, academic attainment, and personality—everything from low social class to low IQ to impulsivity), only two were related to violence independent of all other risk factors: low resting heart rate and poor concentration. Indeed, low heart rate was even more strongly related to measures of violence than having a criminal parent" ([Raine 2014:115](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=115))

#### "medications like stimulants that raise heart rate reduce antisocial behavior. [...] I collected heart-rate data on 622 Hong Kong students and asked them about their habits, including how many times they ever crossed the road on a red light. We found a difference. It was not big, just two beats a minute, but it was statistically significant and in the right direction." ([Raine 2014:116](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=116))

#### "So low resting heart rate represents one of the best replicated, most easily measured, and most promising biological correlates of antisocial and aggressive behavior." ([Raine 2014:117](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=117))

#### "low heart rate provides the underpinning for a fearless, uninhibited temperament in infancy and childhood, and that the more uninhibited a preschooler is, the more aggressive he or she will be later in life. Adolescents with low heart rates are also better able to stand stress, indicating that such individuals are more insensitive to social stressors, including socializing punishments. [...] Children with low heart rates are less empathic than children with high heart rates. [...] low arousal represents an unpleasant physiological state, and that those who display antisocial behavior seek stimulation to increase their arousal" ([Raine 2014:118](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=118))

#### "high-scoring stimulation seekers at age three—the top 15 percent—were more aggressive at age eleven. To be sure, not all stimulation-seekers became aggressive. But to some extent, the early behavior of young children predicted later aggression." ([Raine 2014:121](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=121))

#### "Psychopaths are always more than willing to blame others to justify their actions. They apply the "just deserts" principle to defend their heinous actions. Others get what they deserve because of how they behave. [...] The desire for discovery, to experience the world, and to give full expression to one's fearless, stimulation-seeking potential need not always result in criminality." ([Raine 2014:123](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=123))

#### "Seventy-six percent of "normal" men have had at least one homicidal fantasy. For normal women the rate is a bit lower, at 62 percent. Who do you want to kill? Men think about killing co-workers, while women want to kill their family members, especially stepparents. [...] 3 percent of you have fantasized about killing someone just to experience what it is like to kill someone." ([Raine 2014:124](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=124))

#### "The self-report survey I conducted on Hong Kong undergraduates showed that 67 percent had passed off other people's essays as their own work. Similarly, 66.6 percent had copied others' work to meet a course requirement." ([Raine 2014:126f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=126))

#### "an early impairment in autonomic fear conditioning acts as a predisposition to criminality in adulthood. [...] What part of the brain is critical for fear conditioning? The amygdala" ([Raine 2014:129](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=129))

#### "temp agencies are wonderfully safe havens for psychopaths—almost a breeding ground. Psychopaths gain in life by ferociously exploiting others. To begin with, their superficial charm allows them to succeed with their parasitic lifestyle, but ultimately they get caught out by those around them. Once detected, they can pack up and move on to the next social group of victims that they will suck dry. Temporary-employment agencies allow this freedom of movement. They also conduct more limited background checks compared with companies hiring full-time employees. Furthermore, psychopaths are impulsive and unreliable—they only rarely hold down a permanent job. Temporary jobs, in contrast, limit the time that their flaws can be detected by employers. Psychopaths are also stimulation-seekers and love to be on the move for new experiences, and temp agencies give them that freedom, even to move from city to city." ([Raine 2014:132f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=132))

#### "stimulation, of the emotional limbic system can in some cases occur during the killing. This causes hyperactivation of the autonomic nervous system—resulting in nausea, vomiting, profuse sweating, incontinence, or even vertigo." ([Raine 2014:140](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=140))

#### "Ted Kaczynski epitomizes the cold-hearted violent offender, as he had a resting heart rate of 54 beats per minute, 90 which would place him in the bottom 3 percent of my temporary-employment-agency sample—a sample already biased toward low heart rates. He had the same sense of fearlessness and low resting heart rate that bomb-disposal experts have." ([Raine 2014:141](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=141))

#### "Kaczynski had at the minimum multiple features of both schizotypal personality disorder and paranoid personality disorder—features that include odd beliefs, paranoid ideation, no close friends, eccentric behavior, and a blunted affect. [...] according to his mother, Kaczynski was separated from her and the family when he was hospitalized at the age of nine months. This resulted in his afterward being withdrawn, unresponsive, and fearful of separation. Interestingly, separation anxiety disorder can lead to detachment, isolation, and difficulty developing relationships—all of which strongly characterized Kaczynski." ([Raine 2014:142](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=142))

#### "a subarachnoid cyst was growing in his left frontal lobe. This cyst displaced brain tissue in both frontal and temporal cortices. [...] For the first time, brain-imaging data had been used in a capital case prior to the trial itself to bargain down both the crime and the ensuing punishment. The case of Herbert Weinstein" ([Raine 2014:145](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=145))

#### "Lombroso [...] was absolutely correct in espousing structural brain abnormalities as a predisposition to violence." ([Raine 2014:147](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=147))

#### "Those with a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder—lifelong persistent antisocial behavior—had an 11 percent reduction in the volume of gray matter in the prefrontal cortex. White matter volume was normal. Antisocial bacon has plenty of fat—just not enough meat, not enough neurons." ([Raine 2014:148f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=148))

#### "We therefore created a control group who did not have antisocial personality disorder, but who did abuse drugs and alcohol. We then compared the two groups. The result? The antisocial group had a 14 percent reduction in prefrontal gray volume compared with the drug-abuse control group, a slightly bigger group difference than that between normal controls and antisocials. So drugs are not the cause of the structural brain deficit [...] we created a psychiatric control group that was not antisocial but that was matched with the antisocial group on all the clinical disorders that the antisocial group had. Yet again, we found that the antisocial group had a 14 percent prefrontal volume reduction compared with this psychiatric control group." ([Raine 2014:149](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=149))

#### "We controlled for a whole host of social risk factors for crime, including social class, divorce, and child abuse, but found that the prefrontal cortex-antisocial relationship held firm. And unlike the case of Herbert Weinstein, there were no visible lesions in our antisocial subjects that could account for the volume reduction. We are left with the possibility that this structural impairment has a subtle early origin. For whatever reason—be it environmental or genetic—the brain is not developing normally throughout infancy, childhood, and adolescence." ([Raine 2014:149f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=149))

#### "you would not see the 11 percent reduction in gray-matter volume. That reduction corresponds to just half a millimeter in thickness of the thin outer cortical ribbon [...]. The difference is visually imperceptible not just to your eye but also to the eye of the world's best-trained neuroradiologist. Indeed, an expert neuroradiologist would actually judge the brain scan of the antisocial individual to be quite normal." ([Raine 2014:150](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=150))

#### "while their electrodermal response system is otherwise intact and responsive, patients with ventral prefrontal damage do not give skin-conductance responses to socially meaningful pictures such as disasters and mutilations. [...] at a cognitive level, such neurological patients make bad decisions." ([Raine 2014:151](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=151))

#### "the lack of autonomic, emotional responsivity results in an inability to reason and decide advantageously in risky situations. This in turn is very likely to contribute to the impulsivity, rule-breaking, and reckless, irresponsible behavior that make up four of the seven traits of antisocial personality disorder." ([Raine 2014:152](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=152))

#### "antisocial individuals showed a 9 percent bilateral reduction in the orbitofrontal gyrus, together with a 16 percent reduction in the volume of the right ventromedial prefrontal cortex. It is structural impairment to the ventral region of the prefrontal cortex that seems to be particularly implicated in antisocial, psychopathic behavior—the same brain region devastated by the tamping rod on that fateful day for Phineas Gage in 1848." ([Raine 2014:158](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=158))

#### "Our antisocial subjects had a 20 percent volume reduction in the right middle frontal gyrus. [...] The middle frontal gyrus is also involved in moral decision-making [...]. It is further involved in choosing delayed rewards as opposed to immediate rewards, and it is well documented that offenders are less able to delay gratification. It is activated by empathy to pain stimuli [...] is also activated when we look inward and evaluate our own thoughts and feelings." ([Raine 2014:159](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=159))

#### "Men had a 12.6 percent volume reduction in the orbitofrontal gray compared with women. [...] more than half of the reason men and women differ in crime seems to be because their brains are physically different." ([Raine 2014:161](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=161))

#### "Sex differences in prefrontal gray have been documented in several other MRI studies. One imaging study found a 16.7 percent reduction in orbitofrontal volumes in men compared with women. [...] Men have also been reported to show lower activation of the orbitofrontal cortex compared with women when performing a wide variety of cognitive and emotional tasks, including verbal fluency, working memory, processing threat stimuli, and working memory during a negative emotional context. Men simply have different brains from women, and it's pointless to cover up and ignore these fundamental sex differences." ([Raine 2014:162](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=162))

#### "the Spanish Phineas Gage—referred to here as SPG—a twenty-one-year-old university student living in Barcelona. [...] The damage to his prefrontal cortex was quite extensive, and, just like Gage, he lost vision in his left eye. [...] Just like Gage, he was impatient, restless, impulsive, and would move from one thing to another, unable to properly finish any single task. [...] SPG did not develop the antisocial, psychopathic personality that characterized Gage. [...] At the time of the accident, he was engaged to his childhood sweetheart. [...] love helped conquer the antisocial sequelae […] SPG's sweetheart stood by him, and three years after the horrific accident, they were married. Unlike Gage, SPG had spousal support, and his support system did not end there. For the rest of his life he was able to hold down a steady job in one location […] His parents were wealthy and owned a family firm where SPG was employed for the rest of his life. His poor executive functioning meant that he was never a particularly good worker. He could do only basic manual tasks and always had to be closely supervised and checked. Yet a job it was, and with it came security and occupational functioning. [...] He not only had a devoted wife and caring, affluent parents to support him, but he also went on to have two loving children who were destined to play a role in his psychosocial rehabilitation. In the words of his daughter: As a child, I realized that my father was a "protected" person. When I was young I soon saw what the "problem" was, although I had always suspected it. At 17, I became part of this protection, and I still am." ([Raine 2014:163f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=163))

#### "here our case was antisocial before the head injury. [...] a thirteen-year-old-boy from Utah [...] a well-documented history of conduct disorder, risk-taking, hyperactivity, and attention-deficit disorder. [...] was playing Russian roulette by himself [...]. He succeeded in punching a hole right through his prefrontal cortex. […] His social workers, foster parents, psychologist, and all legal authorities who had been managing his case agreed that he was completely unchanged by the brain damage. He was the same unruly, conduct-disordered urchin that he always had been. But he was not worse. He did not even show any additional cognitive deficits. [...] the young teenager had succeeded in knocking out only the piece of his medial prefrontal cortex that was already dysfunctional" ([Raine 2014:164f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=164))

#### "a thirty-three-year-old man from Philadelphia who had a history replete with antisocial and aggressive behavior throughout his life—a life-course persistent offender who was pathologically aggressive. He was also depressed. [...] was instead transformed from an aggressive, irritable, emotionally labile antisocial into a quiet, docile, and content man. The pathological aggression was eradicated overnight. The depression disappeared [...] he became "inappropriately cheerful."" ([Raine 2014:166](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=166))

#### "Puerile jocularity is one neurological symptom of damage to the prefrontal cortex [...] when at your next work party you meet that disinhibited, loquacious extravert who tells bad jokes and laughs at them like there is no tomorrow, make a neurological note to yourself and suspect either a spiked bar, a crossbow bolt—or perhaps just plain old frontal-lobe dysfunction." ([Raine 2014:167](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=167))

#### "We don't know what specific factors can account for the limbic maldevelopment that gives rise to cavum septum pellucidum. We do know, however, that maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy plays a role. [...] boxers are more likely to have cavum septum pellucidum than controls. [...] cavum septum pellucidum nudges the individual into developing an aggressive personality. Those with aggressive tendencies are more likely to take up boxing" ([Raine 2014:169](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=169))

#### "it's an early neurodevelopment disorder that puts their limbic system out of kilter and places them on a path to crime. Add in a degree of frontal-lobe dysfunction, and they lose full control of their basic instincts—whether it's sex or aggression or both. [...] No brain area is more important in the minds of neuroscientists for emotion than the amygdala." ([Raine 2014:170](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=170))

#### "both the right and left amygdalae are impaired in psychopaths—although the deficits are greatest on the right. Overall, there was an 18 percent reduction in the volume of the amygdala in psychopaths. [...] Three of the thirteen nuclei were found to be particularly deformed in psychopaths—the central, basolateral, and cortical nuclei." ([Raine 2014:171](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=171))

#### "The central nucleus is strongly involved in the control of autonomic nervous system functions and is also involved in attention and vigilance. Not surprisingly, it plays a particularly important role in classical conditioning, and we saw earlier that fear conditioning is the key to conscience, with psychopaths and criminals having fear-conditioning deficits as well as attentional deficits. The basolateral nucleus is important in avoidance learning—learning not to do things that result in punishment. In this respect, recidivistic offenders just cannot learn when to give up on criminal behaviors that get them punished with imprisonment. The cortical nucleus has been shown to be involved in positive parenting behaviors, and we know what lousy parents psychopaths make. [...] Unlike the ventral prefrontal cortex and the frontal pole (the very front of the brain), which are quite susceptible to damage resulting from environmental head injuries, the amygdala, with its location deep in the brain, is not generally affected by environmental insults." ([Raine 2014:172](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=172))

#### "When the brains of children suffering from fetal alcohol syndrome are scanned, it is found that the right-greater-than-left hippocampal volume that is found in normal controls is exaggerated by 80 percent. [...] Other researchers have similarly observed overall smaller hippocampal volumes in violent alcoholics. [...] The hippocampus patrols the dangerous waters of emotion. For one thing, it is critically important in associating a specific place with punishment—something that helps fear conditioning." ([Raine 2014:174](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=174))

#### "The hippocampus and amygdala are located in the inner side of your temporal cortex. But that's not right in the middle of your brain. What is in the middle is the corpus callosum—a colossal body of over 200 million nerve fibers that connect your two cerebral hemispheres. These fibers—the corona radiata—radiate out from the very center of your brain to the outer areas of your cerebral hemispheres, interconnecting many different brain regions. We measured the volume of the corpus callosum and its corona radiata and found that this volume is much bigger in psychopaths with antisocial personality disorder. It was also longer. And thinner too. A long, thin body of white matter. It's as if there is too much connectivity in the brains of psychopaths—too much cross talk between the two hemispheres. What do we make of this? Although we often think of psychopaths as antisocial villains with a lot of negative characteristics, they're actually a lot of fun. They have a lot of positive features, especially on the surface. In particular, many psychopaths have the gift of gab. They are very glib, very charming, very good con artists who can convince you of almost anything. Robert Hare—regarded by many as one of the world's leading researchers on psychopathy—has demonstrated, using something called the dichotic listening task, that psychopaths are less "lateralized" for language. We found the same thing in juvenile psychopaths. What does this mean? In many of us, the left hemisphere is largely responsible for language processing—language is strongly lateralized to the left hemisphere. But in psychopaths it's more of a mix of both left and right hemispheres. This might be why they seem to be so adept in their verbal skills. They have two hemispheres—not one—that they can utilize for language processing. This in turn could be due to a larger, better communicating corpus callosum." ([Raine 2014:175](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=175))

#### "young psychopaths showed much greater response to the reward cards than the non-psychopaths. They were hooked on rewards […] psychopaths can learn—as long as you use rewards to shape their behavior. [...] The striatum is a key brain region that is associated with reward-seeking and impulsive behavior. Studies have also showed that it is involved in stimulation-seeking behavior, persistently repeating actions that are related to rewards, and enhanced learning from reward stimuli. [...] the difference between us and psychopaths is that we can say no when tempted by the goodies, whereas psychopaths just want their stuff. And they want it here, and they want it now. For them, reward is a drug that they cannot turn their backs on" ([Raine 2014:177](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=177))

#### "Increased striatal volumes have also been found in those with antisocial personality disorder, while increased striatal functioning has been observed in violent alcoholics as well as aggressive adolescents and adults. [...] A full 45 percent of psychopaths are motivated by money in the crimes they perpetrate. Studies also show that it takes less money to push psychopaths into violating moral principles than non-psychopaths. But more troublingly, aggressive, conduct-disordered kids show increased activity of the striatum when they view images of other people in pain. Somewhat sickeningly, these aggressive children seem to enjoy seeing people in pain, not unlike a number of serial killers who cruelly torture and maim their victims. [...] The right hippocampus is larger than the left in psychopaths. The striatum is larger. The corpus callosum also has a bigger volume." ([Raine 2014:178](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=178))

#### "A born criminal? Not really. But a baby whose brain is compromised in its development? [...] We lie about almost anything. When do we lie most? Community surveys show it's on our first date with a new person. And this gives us a clue as to why we lie so much—it's impression management." ([Raine 2014:179](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=179))

#### "Why are we so bad at knowing who's a liar? It's because all the things that we think are signs of lying are quite unrelated to the ability to detect deception. [...] shifty gaze, hesitations in their speech, their fidgeting, or their going off-topic into some detail. In reality, none of these are related to lying." ([Raine 2014:180](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=180))

#### "getting young children to talk about moral issues first and then asking them to promise to tell the truth significantly encourages a truthful answer—boosting lie detection accuracy from 40 percent to 60 percent." ([Raine 2014:182](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=182))

#### "the volume of white matter in the prefrontal cortex was greater in pathological liars [...] They had a 22 percent volume increase compared with normal controls, and a 26 percent increase compared with criminal controls." ([Raine 2014:183](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=183))

#### "during lie-telling, individuals suppress unnecessary body movements. [...] They sit still and suppress motor activity because they are cognitively focusing on their story. [...] Brain weight reaches adult values between the ages of ten and twelve, with a very significant increase in the absolute volume of white matter by this age. We also know that children become most adept at lying at the same time—by ten years of age." ([Raine 2014:184](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=184))

#### "Could it be that the act of pathological lying causes the physical increase in white matter in the prefrontal cortex? This "Pinocchio's nose" hypothesis is not as ridiculous as it may sound. It's the concept of brain plasticity. The more time that musicians spend in practicing the piano, the greater the development of their white matter, especially in childhood. Practicing lying in childhood might particularly enhance prefrontal white matter." ([Raine 2014:185](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=185))

#### "white-collar offenders did appear to have skills that would normally make for quite a successful business executive. Second, they gave larger skin-conductance responses to both neutral auditory stimuli and "speech-like" stimuli. They not only gave bigger responses to the initial presentation of these stimuli—indicating greater attention—but they kept on responding to repeated presentations of these stimuli. They were able to sustain their attention. This greater orienting, or "What is it?" response reflects better functioning of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, the medial temporal cortex, and the temporal-parietal junction, areas that we have seen previously to be dysfunctional in offenders." ([Raine 2014:187f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=187))

#### "the brains of the white-collar criminals were physically different from those of the controls. They showed greater cortical thickness in several regions of interest. [...] increased cortical thickness of this area is consistent with increased cognitive flexibility and regulatory control in white-collar criminals. [...] increased thickness specifically in this anterior region of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex suggests that whitecollar criminals are particularly driven by abstract monetary rewards like money, as opposed to less abstract rewards. [...] Unlike conventional criminals, who have somatic-marker deficits and poor decision-making skills, white-collar criminals may be characterized by relatively better decision-making skills." ([Raine 2014:189](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=189))

#### "birth complications and rejection by their mothers in the first year of life. [...] 9 percent of them became violent offenders. Furthermore, although only 4.5 percent of the population had both birth complications and early child rejection, this small group accounted for 18 percent of all violent crimes [...]. First, rearing in a public-care institution in the first year of life was critical. Second, an attempt to abort the fetus also came up trumps. These were the two elements of maternal rejection that interacted with birth complications in producing later violence. In contrast, if the mother simply did not want the pregnancy but took no action, it did not seem to affect long-term outcome. Furthermore, the interaction was found to be specific to more serious forms of violence like robbery, rape, and murder—but not for less serious forms like threats of violence." ([Raine 2014:196](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=196))

#### "Hypoxia at birth was also found in one study to be the best predictor of a lack of self-control, a key behavioral risk factor for crime and especially for explosive, impulsive aggression." ([Raine 2014:198](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=198))

#### "birth complications result in lower IQ, and this in turn results in problem behavior in later childhood—more specifically, aggression, antisocial behavior, and hyperactivity." ([Raine 2014:199](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=199))

#### "there is a critical period early in life when being connected with the mother really counts. In humans this starts at about six months and ends after about two years. For this reason breakage of the mother-infant bonding process for at least four months in the first year of life [...] freezes the social-interpersonal development of the infant. That freezing results in the glacial, emotionless psychopath that we see in adulthood." ([Raine 2014:200](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=200))

#### "the decisive issue is whether you have someone to bond with—anyone at all. It could be a stand-in mother figure not genetically related to you, like a nanny, or your father, or even an elder sibling who takes on the caregiving role. As long as you have the opportunity to consistently bond with any human early in life, you derive the basis for appropriate social relationships. [...] about 20 percent of all homicides take place within the family, and of these about two-thirds can be viewed as reactive aggression" ([Raine 2014:201](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=201))

#### "Lombroso believed he saw physiological signs of the "born criminal," and witnessed multiple hallmarks of Cain that he called "atavistic stigmata" and that he fervently believed set criminal offenders apart biologically from the rest of us. Do you have the mark of Cain? Take your right hand, lay it palm up, and relax it. Fold the fingers of this hand a little toward you. Can you see one continuous crease that goes all the way across the top of your palm? Or do you see two main creases that do not join together? If you have a single palmar crease, bad luck. According to Lombroso, you have the atavistic stigmata that makes you an evolutionary throwback to lower species. Now take off your shoes and socks, stand up, and look down at your feet. Do you see a big gap between the first and second toe? If you do things are not looking good—another strike against you. There are others. If you want to see if you have one that I have, stick your tongue out and look at it in the mirror. Do you see a fissure—a line running down the middle of it? Another mark of Cain. [...] The "stigmata" outlined above are just three of a number of what are now called "minor physical anomalies." These anomalies have been associated with disorders of pregnancy and are thought to be a marker for fetal neural maldevelopment at about the third or fourth months of pregnancy. For example, during fetal development your ears sit relatively low on your head, but they begin to drift up to their normal positions at about four months of development. If disruption occurs to fetal brain development at this time, there is incomplete embryonic migration of the ear anlage—essentially, the ears will not migrate to their normal position, resulting in low-seated ears. These anomalies are viewed as indirect markers of abnormal brain […] other minor physical anomalies include adherent (attached) earlobes, electrostatic hair, and curved little fingers. It is believed that they may be caused by environmental teratogenic influences acting on the fetus, factors such as anoxia, bleeding, infection—or fetal exposure to alcohol. Don't worry if like me you have only one or two minor physical anomalies—it's having a handful that really counts." ([Raine 2014:202f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=202))

#### "minor physical anomalies in boys assessed at age fourteen predicted violent delinquency at age seventeen. Interestingly, at this age, the relationship was specific to violent offending—it was not observed for nonviolent forms of delinquency. [...] Minor physical anomalies assessed by pediatricians at age twelve predicted violent offending at age twenty-one [...] Lombroso was at least partially on the mark with his theory for Cain-like atavistic stigmata for criminal offending." ([Raine 2014:203](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=203))

#### "Males [...] tend to have a longer ring finger compared with their index finger than women do. [...] Sometime between ten and eighteen weeks of gestation there is a major surge in testosterone production that among other things produces the primary gender differences we see at birth. It not only masculinizes the nervous system and behavior, but it also influences the ratio of the length of the second to the fourth digit. The higher the testosterone exposure, the longer the size of the ring finger relative to the index finger. [...] Women who have larger waists relative to their hips often have higher testosterone levels, and such women have been found in turn to give birth to children with relatively longer ring fingers." ([Raine 2014:204](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=204))

#### "A study in Poland shows that females who have achieved elite status in athletics have relatively longer ring fingers [...]. Male British symphony orchestra musicians also have relatively longer ring fingers. [...] English soccer players who are in the first team have longer ring fingers than those who are in the reserves. [...] People who are relatively lacking in empathy also have longer index fingers [...] Hyperactive children have a longer ring finger [...] Gay men's ring-finger lengths are often in between those of heterosexual men and heterosexual women." ([Raine 2014:205](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=205))

#### "Men with long ring fingers are more likely to use threats of aggression against their female romantic partners. They are also more physically violent toward them" ([Raine 2014:206](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=206))

#### "students with longer ring fingers launched more unprovoked attacks, an effect that was as strong as the gender difference in aggression. [...] Smoking cigarettes during pregnancy can result in higher prenatal-testosterone exposure to the fetus that leaves its mark on finger length. We suspect this because mothers who smoke have higher testosterone levels, and this can in turn reduce estrogen exposure to the fetus" ([Raine 2014:207](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=207))

#### "in Turkey examined 161 fetuses that had been aborted at different stages of pregnancy and made exact measurements of finger lengths. They established that the gender difference was present by the end of the third month of gestation. There really does seem to be a process in place very early on in life that contributes to aggression many years later. [...] the pre-birth period is more important than we have previously thought. Of course, mothers cannot control their hormone levels during pregnancy [...] if a mother smokes during pregnancy it not only has negative consequences on brain development, but it also leads to increased rates of conduct disorder and aggression in her offspring. [...] twofold increase in adult violent offending in the offspring of mothers who smoked twenty cigarettes a day" ([Raine 2014:208](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=208))

#### "secondhand exposure to cigarette smoking predicted conduct disorder […] neurotoxic effects of two constituents of cigarette smoke—carbon monoxide and nicotine. Nicotine passes across the placenta, directly exposing the fetus. A primary effect is that it reduces uterine blood flow and consequently reduces both nutrients and oxygen to the fetus, producing hypoxia, which can damage the brain. Babies exposed to smoking have been shown to have a reduction in head circumference […] adults who were exposed as a fetus to maternal smoking show that they have thinner orbitofrontal and middle frontal gyral thickness—brain areas that we will see in a later chapter are especially implicated in violence." ([Raine 2014:210](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=210))

#### "Prenatal nicotine exposure, even at relatively low levels, disrupts the development of the noradrenergic neurotransmitter system. […] the sympathetic nervous system gets shut down—and the outcome can be an under-aroused, stimulation-seeking individual. […] in the United States about a quarter of all pregnant mothers smoke, while in the United Kingdom a quarter of smokers who become pregnant continue to do so during pregnancy." ([Raine 2014:211](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=211))

#### "The craniofacial abnormalities in fetal alcohol syndrome sufferers can be striking. The middle part of the face is relatively flat, the upper lip is quite thin, and the eyes tend to be widely spaced. The uncanny result of this is that two unrelated babies in a hospital can look alike if they both have fetal alcohol syndrome. The rate of this syndrome is about 3 babies in every 1,000. 100 More common, however, is the condition of "fetal alcohol effects"—in which just some of the symptoms described above are present—with a base rate of approximately 1 percent. […] A full 61 percent of the sample evidenced juvenile delinquency. Sixty percent were expelled or suspended from school. Forty-five percent showed some form of inappropriate sexual behavior, such as incest, sex with animals, or masturbation in public. More than half of the boys and 33 percent of the girls went on to be arrested or convicted for their offending." ([Raine 2014:212f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=213))

#### "having just one alcoholic drink a week during pregnancy was enough to raise the odds of aggression and delinquency in the children. Indeed, this study documented that drinking any alcohol at all during pregnancy tripled the odds that the child would have clinically significant delinquency." ([Raine 2014:214](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=214))

#### "Those exposed to the famine were two and a half times more likely to develop antisocial personality disorder in adulthood than those not exposed to the famine." ([Raine 2014:217](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=217))

#### "kid having cracks at the corners of your mouth? […] This is angular stomatitis, caused by a riboflavin deficiency, specifically a deficit in vitamin B 2, but it can also reflect niacin deficiency." ([Raine 2014:218](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=218))

#### "In Mauritius, almost all of the children have black hair because they are of Indian, African, or Chinese extraction. But some kids had an orange tinge to their hair. […] It's a sign of zinc, copper, and protein malnutrition that causes dyspigmentation of the hair." ([Raine 2014:219](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=219))

#### "at every single age the malnourished kids had higher scores on all dimensions of what we call "externalizing behavior"— aggression, delinquency, and hyperactivity. [...] the more signs of malnutrition the child had, the higher the score for conduct disorder." ([Raine 2014:219](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=219))

#### "Iron deficiency was especially important. [...] iron is involved in DNA synthesis, neurotransmitter production and functioning, and white-matter formation in the brain. [...] supplemented children's diets with iron show improved cognitive functioning." ([Raine 2014:220](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=220))

#### "If a child had three indicators of malnutrition, her IQ dropped seventeen points. It's a significant tumble: imagine being average in your class and dropping to the bottom 11 percent—not because of who you are, but because of what you don't eat." ([Raine 2014:221](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=221))

#### "Differences in unemployment rates do not seem to explain international differences in homicide and, perhaps surprisingly, neither does urbanization. [...] In countries where people believe love is more important than money, there is less violence." ([Raine 2014:223](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=223))

#### "The greater the fish consumption, the lower the homicide rate." ([Raine 2014:224](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=224))

#### "In a very large sample—11,875 pregnant women from Bristol, England— women who ate more fish during pregnancy had offspring who showed significantly higher levels of prosocial behavior at age seven. [...] those who hardly ever ate fish had higher levels of hostility than those eating fish at least once a week. There are also more behavior problems and temper tantrums in boys with lower total fatty-acid concentrations as measured from blood. The same is true of aggressive cocaine addicts. Even dogs with low levels of omega-3 have been shown to be more aggressive. [...] Omega-3 has two important components—DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) and EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid). What does DHA do? It is known to play a key role in neuronal structure and function. Making up 6 percent of the dry cerebral cortex, it influences the functioning of the blood-brain barrier that regulates what gets into your brain from your bloodstream. It enhances synaptic functioning, facilitating communication between brain cells. It makes up 30 percent of the membrane of your brain cell and regulates the activity of membrane enzymes. It protects the neuron from cell death. It increases the size of the cell. DHA also stimulates neurite outgrowth. There is more intricate dendritic branching in the neurons of animals fed a diet rich in omega-3 compared with those fed a normal diet." ([Raine 2014:225](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=225))

#### "Omega-3 supplementation has been shown to improve learning and memory in animals, and also improves learning in children." ([Raine 2014:226](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=226))

#### "up to one half of all the children in the world have iron or zinc deficiency." ([Raine 2014:227](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=227))

#### "Deprive mice of zinc and their aggression increases threefold. Even before birth, zinc deprivation during pregnancy in rats increases their offspring's aggression. Children and adults in the United States with assaultive and aggressive behavior have abnormally low levels of zinc relative to copper. A Turkish study similarly found that violent schizophrenics had lower zinc and copper ratios than nonviolent schizophrenics. [...] One study found iron deficiency in a third of juvenile delinquents. Preschoolers with low iron also show a reduction in positive emotions. [...] The amygdala and hippocampus, which are impaired in offenders, are packed with zinc-containing neurons." ([Raine 2014:228](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=228))

#### "up to 30 percent of pregnant mothers with low socioeconomic status are believed to be iron-deficient. Smoking during pregnancy also impairs the transportation of zinc from the mother to her fetus [...]. Eight of our twenty-two amino acids are essential because our bodies cannot produce them. [...] When tryptophan is experimentally reduced in men and women, they respond more aggressively when provoked. [...] Where does tryptophan come from? Foods like spinach, fish, and turkey." ([Raine 2014:229](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=229))

#### "a 48 percent reduction in disciplinary offenses after diets were altered in order to reduce refined carbohydrates. Experimental studies in animals have also demonstrated a causal relationship between low blood sugar and aggression in rats. [...] Peru [...] the Quolla Indians have a very high rate of homicide and incessantly feud with each other, and have been called, a bit harshly, "perhaps the meanest and most unlikeable people on earth."" ([Raine 2014:231](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=231))

#### "the Quolla were often hungry and craved sugar. [...] low glucose and glycogen formation predicted which violent offenders would go on to commit further violence eight years later, with the two measures explaining 27 percent of this future recidivism. [...] Diets high in refined carbohydrates can cause extreme fluctuations in blood glucose levels—foods like white bread and white rice. Such foods have the bran, germ, and nutrients stripped from the whole grain, taking away the fiber. Because of the fiber loss, they are rapidly absorbed by the gut, resulting in a large and rapid increase of glucose swishing around in the bloodstream. This in turn triggers an inappropriately large secretion of insulin. Insulin's job is to soak up the excess glucose and convert it into glycogen so that surplus energy can be stored for future use. But too much insulin release results in too much of the available glucose being taken out of circulation. This is bad news for the brain, which requires at least 80 milligrams of glucose a minute to function efficiently. Drop below that mark and you progressively observe symptoms of nervousness and irritability." ([Raine 2014:232](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=232))

#### "kids who ate sweets every day were three times more likely to become violent by age thirty-four." ([Raine 2014:233](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=233))

#### "those with high lead levels had low brain volumes. One of the brain regions most affected was the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex" ([Raine 2014:234](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=234))

#### "For every 5 microgram increase in prenatal blood-lead levels, there was a 40 percent increase in the risk for arrest. Given that a 5 microgram increase from birth to age five still keeps you well below the limits of what the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention considers safe, this constitutes substantial risk from just a moderate, "safe" amount of lead exposure. The last study shows that blood lead very early in life is an important predictor of adult crime." ([Raine 2014:235](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=235))

#### "As lead levels rose throughout the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, so too did violence correspondingly rise in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. When lead levels fell in the late 1970s and early 1980s, so too did violence fall in the 1990s and the first decade of the twenty-first century. Changes in lead levels explained a full 91 percent of the variance in violent offending—an extremely strong relationship. [...] in states where lead levels dropped more quickly, later violent crime also dropped more quickly. Variations in lead levels even correlate with variations in crime rates within cities. [...] Kevin Drum, a political blogger and columnist argues that these findings have been completely ignored by criminologists. He contacted criminology experts and none of them showed a scrap of interest." ([Raine 2014:236](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=236))

#### "would be to recognize the explanatory power of biology theories. Currently that's something very difficult for many social scientists to accept. [...] The shooter, James Oliver Huberty, killed twenty-one people and wounded nineteen others. [...] "He had the highest cadmium level we have ever seen in a human being." Huberty's lead levels were also high [...] Huberty had been a welder for Union Metal for a number of years until he gave it up. The reason he left his welding position? In an exit interview that he gave to his employer upon leaving, he said, "The fumes are making me crazy." [...] High hair-cadmium levels also characterize U.S. elementary schoolchildren with behavioral problems. The same is true for schoolchildren in China, a leading producer of cadmium. [...] A study of schoolchildren living downstream from the mine showed that hair-cadmium levels explain 13 percent of the variation in their aggressive and delinquent behavior." ([Raine 2014:237](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=237))

#### "cadmium is a hazardous substance that can cause death and is banned by the European Union for use in electrical equipment. Yet about 75 percent of all cadmium in the United States is used in rechargeable nickel-cadmium batteries rolling around your home right now. Not too harmful there, perhaps, but cadmium does find its way into the environment from municipal waste grounds and fossil fuels because products containing cadmium are rarely recycled. The people most susceptible to cadmium? Smokers. They inhale about 10 percent of the cadmium content of a cigarette, which gets nicely absorbed into the bloodstream from the lungs. They end up with five times the cadmium levels of nonsmokers. The rest of us get exposed too, because foods like offal (the internal organs of animals) and cereals 91 account for 98 percent of our cadmium intake. In contrast, seafood, which we saw earlier to be associated with lower violence, accounts for only 1 percent. The twist here is that the amount of cadmium acting on your body is a function of other factors. Iron blocks the intestinal absorption of cadmium. Women on vegetarian diets have reduced iron levels and they also have increased cadmium exposure. If they smoke as well they will have an exponential increase in cadmium. This may partly explain why low iron is associated with violence—individuals with low iron levels are more susceptible to the negative effects of cadmium on the brain." ([Raine 2014:238](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=238))

#### "areas in the United States with higher levels of manganese in the air have higher violent-crime rates" ([Raine 2014:239](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=239))

#### "The cusp tip of the first molar gives a handle on manganese exposure halfway through pregnancy—a time when a fetus's brain is rapidly expanding. Using these teeth, researchers showed that kids with high prenatal manganese levels had disinhibited, antisocial behavior across the board on a host of antisocial-behavior measures. 98 What causes excessive manganese exposure during pregnancy? A deficiency in iron—the micronutrient that when low is associated with high antisocial behavior—enhances manganese absorption. Women with low iron levels absorb about four times more manganese than women with high iron levels. An early postnatal source of manganese is soy infant formula, which has eighty times the amount of manganese that natural breast milk has. It's possible that the higher IQs found in breastfed babies may be due to formula-fed babies' being exposed to high manganese, because manganese excretion is controlled by the liver. The livers of babies are underdeveloped, and consequently they are less able to excrete manganese. The excessive manganese could then result in poorer brain functioning and lower IQs. Put the two together and you begin to build a recipe for violence. Pregnant mothers have a tendency to have low iron. This will result in increased manganese exposure to the fetuses. Then, when the nippers are born, they get soy milk with a hefty dose of manganese that their little livers cannot deal with." ([Raine 2014:239f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=239))

#### "fifteen studies on workers exposed to manganese in all corners of the world—including Chile, Great Britain, Egypt, Poland, Brazil, the United States, Scotland, and Canada—without exception report significant mood disruption, including aggression, hostility, irritability, and emotional disturbances. In Chile the term used is locura manganica—meaning "manganese madness." It refers to violence, mood disturbances, and irrational behavior. [...] Of all the heavy metals, this one may or may not play a role in violence—a fact that is both striking and enlightening. Mercury is toxic to the brain and other body organs, with about half of human-generated mercury coming from coal plants. Dental amalgams are another source, and fish are also argued to be a major dietary contributor. Despite its toxicity, to my knowledge there are no convincing demonstrations that antisocial and violent individuals have higher mercury levels." ([Raine 2014:240](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=240))

#### "One study, conducted in the Faroe Islands, between Scotland and Iceland, found high mercury to be associated with poorer cognitive functioning. The other study, in the Seychelles, which is just up the road from Mauritius, in the Indian Ocean, found no association between mercury and cognitive-behavioral outcomes. [...] Where do people get mercury from? Supposedly from eating fish that are high up in the food chain—particularly shark, swordfish, and king mackerel, which are certainly on the no-go list for pregnant mothers. In the Faroe Islands they also eat a whole load of pilot whale [...]. It's not just very high up in the food chain and high in mercury, but it's also low on selenium. [...] Selenium not only protects against this damage but, more important, it binds with mercury. Like a magnet, selenium latches onto mercury and keeps it from binding with brain tissue, thus preventing brain and cognitive impairment. [...] the high-mercury and low-selenium diet in the Faroe Islands translates into poor cognitive and behavioral functioning. And yet in the Seychelles, pregnant women are also exposed to mercury, eating twelve portions of fish a week. That's a lot, twelve times the consumption of American women. [...] they eat fish high in selenium that buffers them from mercury and its cognitive impairments." ([Raine 2014:241](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=241))

#### "Schizophrenia turns out not to be caused by faulty parent-child communication patterns but is instead a debilitating, brain-based, neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delusions, hallucinations, thought disorder, lack of emotion, and disorganized behavior. Affecting about 1 percent of the population around the world, it frequently hits women in their early twenties and men in late adolescence, with about 40 percent of male schizophrenia cases occurring before the age of nineteen—an intriguing fact given that these late adolescent years are also the peak age for violence in men. [...] we find many of the same risk factors that we have seen earlier characterizing violence. Things like frontal-lobe dysfunction, neurocognitive impairment, fetal maldevelopment, birth complications, blunted brain responses to stimuli we should normally pay attention to, and orienting abnormalities. To be sure, crime and schizophrenia are certainly not the same condition. They present very differently to the clinician. And there are risk factors like low resting heart rate that are unique to crime and unrelated to schizophrenia. Yet, at some causal level, there is a degree of common ground. [...] schizophrenia patients are much more likely than normal controls to have a history of violent and criminal behavior." ([Raine 2014:243](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=243))

#### "there is a "watered-down" version of schizophrenia with a higher base rate in the general population. We have exactly that in a clinical condition called schizotypal personality disorder. Instead of hearing voices of nonexistent people, as schizophrenics do, schizotypals mistake an actual noise in the environment for someone speaking. [...] We can measure schizotypal personality quite well using simple self-report questionnaires." ([Raine 2014:244](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=244))

#### ""When you look at a person, or yourself in a mirror, have you ever seen the face change right before your eyes"? We found in Los Angeles that 18 percent of supposedly high-functioning undergraduates said yes to this item. "Have you had experiences with astrology, seeing the future, UFOs ESP, or a sixth sense?" Forty-nine percent say they have. "I feel I have to be on my guard, even with friends" has 21 percent endorsement, while 31 percent agreed that "some people think that I am a very bizarre person." When we brought in the students whose total score was in the top 10 percent of the undergraduate population for a clinical interview, 55 percent of this group received a clinical diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder— equivalent to 5.5 percent of the total undergraduate population, much higher than the 1 percent base rate for schizophrenia. [...] those with higher scores on the "Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire" have higher scores on self-reported measures of crime and violence. They parallel what many others find in clinical populations of schizophrenics. [...] Paranoid schizophrenics are overly suspicious of other people's intentions" ([Raine 2014:245](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=245))

#### "Schizotypals also have no close friends outside of their family members [...]. schizophrenics have enlarged ventricles— large fluid-filled spaces in the deeper areas of the brain that likely reflect brain atrophy." ([Raine 2014:246](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=246))

#### "Schizotypal kids are picked on because they are odd, shy, and different, and because of that, they reacted by lashing out in anger at others." ([Raine 2014:247](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=247))

#### "seven symptoms of schizoid personality disorder: lack of close friends, chooses solitary activities, emotional detachment, and does not desire close relationships or being part of a family. [...] odd appearance/behavior, constricted affect, social anxiety, and odd speech. [...] there are many other mental disorders—including depression, bipolar disorder, ADHD, and borderline personality disorder—that are also significant mental-health risk factors for violence." ([Raine 2014:251](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=251))

#### "Henry would go on to become one of the most prolific serial killers in history. He was eventually convicted of eleven homicides committed over a twenty-three-year period, from 1960 to 1983, but he was implicated in a massive 189 altogether. All his victims were female—but we'll return to that issue later. For now his case is particularly salutary in illustrating how a toxic mix of biological and social factors can conspire to create a serial killer." ([Raine 2014:253](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=253))

#### "That mix of biological and social deprivation created a surprisingly efficient killing machine, given the disadvantages Lucas was dealt in life. On the biological side there are three very important risk factors for violence that have been highlighted in previous chapters—head injury, poor nutrition, and genetic heritage from his antisocial parents. These are abetted by a host of social risk factors, including abuse, neglect, humiliation, maternal rejection, abject poverty, overcrowding, being in a bad neighborhood, induction into alcoholism, and complete absence of care and sense of belonging. It was this bitter brew—this very cruel concoction—that turned Lucas into an alcoholic killer. Lucas's case, while extreme, is not exactly unusual." ([Raine 2014:254](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=254))

#### "if you were just brought up in an unstable home environment you have a 20 percent chance of committing violence. But when minor physical anomalies are added into the mix, that rate jumps to 70 percent" ([Raine 2014:256](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=256))

#### "The rate of violence in early adulthood in the poverty-only group was 3.5 percent, compared with 12.5 percent for the biosocial group. As before, we see here more than a threefold increase. The biosocial group also had more than fourteen times the rate of total crime of the normal controls. Even though all three groups were of approximately equal size, the biosocial group accounted for 70.2 percent of all the crimes perpetrated by the entire sample." ([Raine 2014:259](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=259))

#### "Hans Eysenck, Britain's best-known and most controversial psychologist, had already lit a fuse with his controversial book Crime and Personality, in which he had the audacity to suggest that crime had a biological basis. Despite the controversy, I believed the book contained a fascinating concept that was related but different—an "antisocialization process." This concept profoundly influenced my work." ([Raine 2014:262](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=262))

#### "If the schoolkids came from a good home, then those who conditioned poorly were antisocial. Yet if they came from a bad home, the reverse was true—those who conditioned well were the antisocial ones" ([Raine 2014:263](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=263))

#### "it's the murderer from the relatively good home background who shows reduced frontal functioning" ([Raine 2014:264](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=264))

#### "Murderers from good homes had a 14.2 percent reduction in right orbitofrontal functioning—a brain area of particular relevance to violence." ([Raine 2014:265](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=265))

#### "When children are adopted, it is often because the biological parents do not want their child, or their behavior is such that the child must be taken away from them. We saw earlier how maternal rejection of the child—especially in combination with biological risk factors like birth complications—is a risk factor for later violence. There is a break in the mother-infant bonding process at a critical period in the time before adoption, and it is not easy for a later loving home to mend that break." ([Raine 2014:266](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=266))

#### "genetic factors shine forth more in explaining antisocial behavior when social risk factors are less in evidence." ([Raine 2014:267](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=267))

#### "we go from genes to brain to aggressive behavior. While this particular subfield of neurocriminology has a very long way to go, we are starting to connect the dots—beginning with malignant genes, moving into brain impairment, and culminating in crime." ([Raine 2014:270](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=270))

#### "If a homicide took place in the child's block four days before testing, it reduced reading scores by almost ten points—or two-thirds of a standard deviation. Similarly, it reduced vocabulary scores by half a standard deviation." ([Raine 2014:271](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=271))

#### "excessive release of cortisol in response to stress is neurotoxic to pyramidal cells in the hippocampus—a brain region critical for learning and memory. [...] The cognitive decline occurred for African-American children—but not Hispanic children. Why exactly that should be is unclear, but we can hypothesize. It could be that Hispanics feel less threatened by homicides than African-Americans do. Sharkey points out that in communities where African-Americans lived, 87 percent of the victims of the homicides were African-American, whereas in the murders that affected Hispanics, only 54 percent of the victims were Hispanic." ([Raine 2014:272](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=272))

#### "Because Hispanic homes tend to have a more nuclear family structure and operate under higher levels of social support, there might be a greater social-buffering effect operating in Hispanic homes compared with African-American homes." ([Raine 2014:272f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=272))

#### "If the brains of African-American children are compromised by high rates of homicide that they experience in their neighborhoods, could this result in a vicious circle of increased violence and shootings in African-American neighborhoods, in turn giving rise to further neighborhood stressors and further cognitive decline?" ([Raine 2014:273](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=273))

#### "The neuroscientist Michael Meaney first demonstrated that rat pups whose mothers licked and groomed them more in their first ten days of life showed changes in gene expression in the hippocampus. They also dealt better with environmental stressors. Indeed, the functioning of more than 900 genes is regulated by maternal licking and grooming in rats. Maternal separation at birth has very similar effects. [...] Protein malnutrition during pregnancy doesn't just alter gene expression in the offspring; the offspring's offspring—the grandchildren—develop abnormal metabolism even when their own parents were fed quite normally." ([Raine 2014:274](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=274))

#### "If sexual abuse occurs early, at around ages three to five, for example, hippocampal volumes are reduced. Yet if sex abuse occurs at age fourteen to sixteen, prefrontal cortical volume is reduced instead." ([Raine 2014:275](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=275))

#### "We've seen that the lives of violent offenders are replete with maternal deprivation, physical and sexual abuse, other trauma, poverty, and poor nutrition. We've also seen how these social impairments have their hit on specific brain areas—the orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and temporal cortex—brain areas that are linked to violence. We can conclude that such social deprivation results in long-term wear and tear of the developing brain to produce adolescent angst and aggression— and, ultimately, adult violence. This truly occurs, and it's never too late for the damage to be done. Adults who lived close to the World Trade Center buildings on September 11, 2001—and thus were exposed to very significant environmental stress—showed a reduction in hippocampal gray-matter volumes when brain-scanned three years later." ([Raine 2014:276](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=276))

#### "The first clinical evaluation confirmed excessive slow-wave activity in Danny's prefrontal cortex—a classic sign of chronic under-arousal. Then came thirty sessions of biofeedback. Danny sat in front of a computer screen with an electrode cap on his head, which measured his brain activity as he played Pac-Man on the computer. Danny controlled Pac-Man, trapped in a maze, and his task was to move around, gobbling up as many pellets as he could. He could only move Pac-Man by maintaining sustained attention—by transforming his frontal slow-wave theta activity into faster-wave alpha and beta activity. If his attention lapsed, Pac-Man stopped. By maintaining his concentration, Danny was able to retrain his under-aroused, immature cortex, which had constantly craved immediate stimulation, into a more mature and aroused brain capable of focusing on a task. It was hardly a quick fix. For Danny, the biofeedback training lasted for nearly a year. But a metamorphosis took place over the course of his thirty treatment sessions. He was radically transformed, from an inattentive, F-grade teenager on a downward spiral toward prison into a mature, straight-A, career-oriented student who ended up passing his exams with distinction. It was a complete reversal of fortune. What accounted for the dramatic change? To begin to answer, we have to look back at what was fueling Danny's antisocial behavior, which started as early as toddlerhood and exploded during adolescence. "I was really bored in school," Danny would say after his treatment was completed, "but all the crimes were really exciting to me. I liked the action, getting away from the cops. I just thought it was so cool."" ([Raine 2014:284](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=284))

#### "Biological and social risk factors then give rise to brain risk factors that are played out at three levels: cognition (e.g., attention deficits), emotion (e.g., lack of conscience), and motor (e.g., disinhibition) processes. This brain dysregulation can then do one of two things. It can move on to directly give rise to conduct disorder and violence, or it can join forces with social influences to form a biosocial interaction that brings on the teenage thunderstorms of emotion." ([Raine 2014:286](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=286))

#### "David Olds [...] His sample consisted of 400 low-social-class pregnant women who were entered into a randomized controlled trial. The intervention group had nine home visits from nurse practitioners during pregnancy, with a further twenty-three follow-up visits in the first two years of the child's life—a critical time window in child development. The nurses gave advice and counseling to the mothers on reducing smoking and alcohol use, improving their nutrition, and meeting the social, emotional, and physical needs of their infant. The control group received standard levels of prenatal and postnatal care. Follow-ups were made on the offspring for fifteen years. The results were dramatic. Compared with controls, the children whose mothers had nurse visitations showed a 52.8 percent reduction in arrests and a 63 percent reduction in convictions. They also showed a 56.2 percent reduction in alcohol use and a 40 percent reduction in smoking. Truancy and destruction of property were reduced by 91.3 percent. These effects were even stronger in mothers who were unmarried and particularly impoverished." ([Raine 2014:287](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=287))

#### "The cost of the intervention per mother was $11,511 in 2006—but the government saved $12,300 in food stamps, Medicaid, and other financial aid to the families. The government actually spent less on the intervention group than they spent on the control group. And that's not counting the savings brought about by reducing crime, and the incalculable benefits of improving people's lives." ([Raine 2014:288](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=288))

#### "What did our enrichment intervention consist of? It started at age three, had a duration of two years, and consisted of three main elements: nutrition, cognitive stimulation, and physical exercise. The enrichment was conducted in two specially constructed nursery schools. Staff members were brought up to speed on physical health—including nutrition, hygiene, and childhood disorders. They also received training on physical activities, including gymnastics and rhythm activities, outdoor activities, and physiotherapy. They were trained on multimodal cognitive stimulation with the use of toys, art, handicrafts, drama, and music. A structured nutrition program provided milk, fruit juice, a hot meal of fish or chicken or mutton, and a salad, each day. Physicalexercise sessions in the afternoons consisted of gym, structured outdoor games, and free play. The enrichment also included walking field trips, basic hygiene skills, and medical inspections. In fact, there was an average of two and a half hours of physical activity each day. Cognitive skills focused on verbal skills, visuospatial coordination, concept formation, memory, sensation, and perception." ([Raine 2014:288f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=288))

#### "The enriched children had significantly lower scores on ratings of conduct disorder and hyperactivity. They were less cruel to others, not so likely to pick fights, not so hot-tempered, and less likely to bully other children. In addition, they were less likely to be bouncing around the place and seeking out stimulation." ([Raine 2014:289f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=289))

#### "The enriched children showed a 34.6 percent reduction in self-reported offending compared with controls. For court convictions the enriched group had a much-reduced rate of offending, at 3.6 percent compared with 9.9 percent in the control group—but this difference just failed to reach statistical significance. [...] kids with normal levels of nutrition at age three who went into the enrichment showed only a small and statistically nonsignificant reduction in conduct disorder. In contrast, when we looked just at those kids who entered the study with poor nutrition, we found that the enrichment showed a 52.6 percent reduction in conduct disorder at age seventeen compared with controls." ([Raine 2014:290](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=290))

#### "perhaps the crime reduction can be chalked up to the young children eating fish. [...] The early enrichment did not eradicate crime. It reduced it by about 35 percent—so that leaves a lot. [...] And maybe the Mauritius miracle crime cure would not apply to other countries that have a different culture and standard of living." ([Raine 2014:292](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=292))

#### "Surgical castration still continues in Germany, ever since a law was passed in 1970 allowing it. It's a voluntary procedure, and only a few are performed every year. Because it sounds barbaric and is so easy to condemn, the German government has put several safeguards in place to regulate it. The offender has to be over twenty-five, and approval is needed from a panel of experts. Nevertheless, it remains a controversial practice in Europe. The Council of Europe's anti-torture committee in Strasbourg, for instance, views it as a degrading treatment that should be halted. [...] The Czech Republic has put over ninety inmates under the knife in the past ten years." ([Raine 2014:293](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=293))

#### "The study that comes the closest to the impossibly ideal experiment was conducted by the medical researchers Reinhard Wille and Klaus M. Beier in Germany in the 1980s. Wille and Beier followed up ninety-nine castrated sex offenders and thirty-five non-castrated sex offenders for, on average, eleven years after release from prison. Such a sample covers about 25 percent of all castrations in the period from 1970 to 1980 [...]. the thirty-five controls had all requested castration—but ended up changing their minds." ([Raine 2014:294](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=294))

#### "Recidivism rates for sexual offenses over the eleven-year post-release period were 3 percent in castrated offenders compared with 46 percent in the non-castrated offenders—a dramatic fifteenfold difference. [...] Rates of reconviction in castrated sex offenders from these ten other castration studies range from 0 percent to 11 percent, with a median of 3.5 percent. [...] 70 percent of castrates in Wille and Beier's study were satisfied with their treatment. [...] One review of 2,055 castrated European sex offenders showed recidivism rates ranging from 0 percent to 7.4 percent over a period of twenty years" ([Raine 2014:295](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=295))

#### "chemical castration. Here anti-androgen medication is given to reduce testosterone—and hence lower both sexual interest and performance. In the United States medroxyprogesterone—or Depo-Provera—is used to increase circulating progesterone. In the United Kingdom and Europe, cyproterone acetate is used, which competes with testosterone at androgen receptors in the brain. Other medications include leuprolide, goserelin, and tryptorelin. In all cases, they reduce testosterone to prepubertal levels." ([Raine 2014:295f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=295))

#### "Because it is somewhat less controversial than physical castration, chemical castration is offered in Britain, Denmark, and Sweden on a voluntary basis to sex offenders. Nevertheless, policy became tougher in Poland since 2009, when offenders who rape either a child under the age of fifteen or a close relative have to undergo chemical castration after release from prison." ([Raine 2014:296](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=296))

#### "Eighty-four percent of the Polish population supported the policy. In South Korea, a new law was put into effect in July 2011 that allows judges to sentence offenders who have committed crimes against children under sixteen to receive chemical castration. In Russia, chemical castration can be recommended by a court-appointed forensic psychiatrist for those who have attacked children under the age of fourteen. In the United States, at least eight states have had laws on chemical castration ever since it was introduced into the Penal Code of California in 1996. In both California and Florida, treatment with Depo-Provera is mandatory for repeat sex offenders and may also be used in some cases with first-time offenders, such as those who have committed a sex crime against children under the age of thirteen. In California, treatment is administered by the Department of Corrections and must begin a week before the parolee is released. It must be continued until the Department of Corrections deems that the offender no longer needs treatment. In Wisconsin, the Department of Corrections can prevent the release of a child sex offender if he refuses to undergo chemical castration. Texas, like Germany, allows surgical castration on a voluntary basis [...]." ([Raine 2014:296](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=296))

#### "A wide variety of medications have been found to be effective in reducing aggression. The most effective are the newer generation of antipsychotics, which show a large effect size of .90. Stimulants like methylphenidate are also very effective, with an effect size of .78. Mood stabilizers have a medium effect size of .40, while antidepressants have a small-to-medium effect size of .30. The same story that we see in children holds true in adolescents." ([Raine 2014:300f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=300))

#### "What's clear is that drug treatment is effective in reducing aggression across a wide range of psychiatric conditions in childhood and adolescence— including ADHD, autism, bipolar disorder, mental retardation, and schizophrenia. [...] cognitive-behavior therapy [...] is the most effective and well-accepted treatment for aggression. The overall effect size? Conservatively it is .30. [...] effect sizes for atypical antipsychotics and stimulants if anything exceed the best non-pharmacological treatments." ([Raine 2014:301](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=301))

#### "anticonvulsants, normally used to stop epileptic seizures [...] have a calming effect on the limbic regions of the brain [...] impulsive, emotional murderers have excessive activation of these limbic subcortical regions, so anticonvulsants may help reduce their impulsive emotional rage attacks by calming their emotional limbic system." ([Raine 2014:302](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=302))

#### "One hundred children drank one pack of the Norwegian Smartfish Recharge juice per day. It's only a 200-millileter drink (less than a cup), but packed into it is a whole gram of omega-3. They took that for six months. [...] six months after the end of the treatment, the control group had returned almost to its pretreatment levels of aggression, whereas the omega-3 group continued to show even further reductions in aggression, delinquency, and attention problems. It was a significant interaction between treatment group and time, with the groups really diverging in outcome a full year after the study had begun." ([Raine 2014:304](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=304))

#### "the half-life of omega-3 in the body could be about two years [...] taking a combination of omega-3 and multivitamin supplements for five months led to a 35 percent reduction in serious offending in young adult prisoners." ([Raine 2014:305](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=305))

#### "Maybe meditation can change the brain for the better. The technique itself is fairly simple. You would have one training session for eight weeks, each one lasting about two hours. You would practice the technique one hour a day at home, six days a week. 86 You would be taught to become more aware—or more mindful—of your internal mental and bodily state. Attention might, for example, be focused on breathing, becoming more aware of your present-moment experiences, and mindfully going through your whole body's sensations and feelings. You are taught to take a compassionate, nonjudgmental stance to yourself—to not, for example, beat yourself up during training if your mind wanders from the task. Later on you would be taught to become aware of yourself in the here and now. Doing all that will change your brain—permanently." ([Raine 2014:307f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=307))

#### "just eight weekly sessions of mindfulness training enhanced left frontal EEG activity." ([Raine 2014:308](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=308))

#### "focusing on a mental state of compassion and loving kindness for others enhanced brain regions involved in empathy and mind-reading. Participants' ability to process emotional stimuli was enhanced, bringing on line the amygdala and the temporal-parietal junction of the brain. Functional imaging research has also shown that expert meditators have greater activation in brain regions involved in attention and inhibition. [...] People who have practiced meditation over a long period later show that at rest—in a non-meditation state—their brain has shifted toward increased attention and alertness as measured by gamma activity —a form of high-frequency EEG activity involved in consciousness, attention, and learning. The more hours of practice, the greater the brain change taking place. [...] The mindfulness group showed a significant increase in the density of cortical gray matter after treatment—a tangible physical change. Enhanced areas included the posterior cingulate and the temporal-parietal junction, areas involved in moral decision-making. The hippocampus was also enhanced, an area critical for learning, memory, conditioning, and aggression regulation and that is impaired by extreme stress. So even though the hippocampus reaches full maturity early in life, its structure can still be enhanced through later environmental change. Another brain-imaging study documented that extensive meditators have increased cortical thickness in the prefrontal cortex compared to controls." ([Raine 2014:308](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=308))

#### "One large-scale study gave mindfulness training to 1,350 inmates and showed significant reductions in their hostility, aggression, and other negative moods. Interestingly, the improvements were stronger in women than in men. Among the men, improvements were stronger for minimum-security prisoners than for maximum-security prisoners—although all groups did improve." ([Raine 2014:309](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=309))

#### "The case of Michael Oft is remarkable because it comes as close as one can get to demonstrating a causal link between brain dysfunction and deviant behavior. A double reversal of fortune over time. Going from normality to a growing tumor to the development of pedophilic urges then back to normality after the tumor is resected—with the pendulum swinging back yet again to repeat this tumor to pedophilia to resection to normality progression." ([Raine 2014:315](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=315))

#### "Francis Crick, who won the Nobel Prize for the discovery of the structure of DNA, for example, believed that free will is nothing more than a large assembly of neurons located in the anterior cingulate cortex, and that under a certain set of assumptions it would be possible to build a machine that would believe it has free will." ([Raine 2014:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=316))

#### "Let's summarize the case of Donta Page here. Teenage pregnancy. Potential birth complications combined with uncaring, callous mother. Total absence of father. Impoverished neighborhood. Vigorous shaking as an infant that likely resulted in a disconnection between the frontal cortex and the limbic system. Sustained and severe physical and sexual abuse, including rape resulting in scarring and rectal bleeding. Total neglect. Early head injuries and multiple visits to the emergency hospital in the first two years of life. Neurotoxic lead exposure. Poor nutrition. A complete lack of supervision. Learning disability. A family history of mental illness and signs of depression, ADHD, and conduct disorder as early as elementary school. Impaired executive functioning and memory. Low physiological arousal. Poor functioning of the orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal cortex in addition to reduced temporal-pole functioning." ([Raine 2014:323](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=323))

#### "Donta Page was a walking time bomb waiting to go off. He was totally unloved and uncared for right from the moment he popped out of his gonorrhea-infected mother's womb. It was Peyton Tuthill's dreadful bad luck to be in the wrong place at the wrong time when Page blew up in her face." ([Raine 2014:323f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=323))

#### "Eight documented referrals for treatment before he had even committed a single crime—and heaven knows how many undocumented referrals. He desperately needed an expert to defuse the toxic mix of risk factors that was thrust upon him so early in life. These were life circumstances he had no control over whatsoever." ([Raine 2014:324](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=324))

#### "Even if Donta Page had been able to recognize and comprehend the implications of the many factors that placed him at high risk for impulsive violence, what was he going to do about it? Go to the police and tell them he felt like raping someone? We know what the societal response to that would be, and you cannot blame an individual for not wanting to be locked up for a long time in prison. There are no self-help groups for foresightful criminals." ([Raine 2014:328](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=328))

#### "Let's take another example. I'll call him Fred Haltoil. Fred was brought up in an abusive household and, according to his sister, was thrashed by a bad-tempered father who had little if any understanding of his son. His home life was traumatic, with four of his siblings who didn't survive beyond childhood. The antagonism between father and son was longstanding and bitter. His family moved repeatedly. Like many offenders he failed in school—having been expelled from one—and left education at the age of sixteen without a diploma. He joined the military, where he proved to be a fearless soldier who fought courageously for his country during wartime. Fred took up one of the most dangerous positions—as a message runner—and was gassed in the process. Hospitalized, he was blind for a month and suffered post-traumatic stress disorder for his near-death experience. Perhaps not surprisingly, like many war veterans his emotional compassion for others was blunted as a result of his traumatic war experiences. Demobilized, Fred was unemployed and slept part of the time in shelters for the homeless, moving around from place to place. Lacking education and useful life skills, he had no true sense of direction or ambition. His social dysfunction was such that he was never able to develop an intimate physical relationship with another person. His repeated attempts to normalize his life by unrealistic applications for art school and architecture were inevitably unsuccessful, given his lack of training and true talent. He was on a downward spiral. After serving a five-year prison term, he, like Page, went on to become a killer after his release." ([Raine 2014:331](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=331))

#### "Perhaps not for Fred Haltoil—alias Adolf Hitler [...]. For any other killer, we might show mercy. But could you ever excuse Adolf Hitler? [...] James Castle, the defense attorney of Donta Page, offered to enter the plea of guilty on all charges and receive a life sentence without the possibility of parole before the trial began. Page would never again be free to terrorize anyone outside of prison. Despite this, the prosecution pressed for the death penalty and went to trial—at great expense to you." ([Raine 2014:332](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=332))

#### "Pedophilia in itself is so "unnatural" that it smacks of a clinical disorder even if there were no corroborative medical evidence. [...] In American law, legal responsibility is defined in terms of mental capacity—specifically, the capacity for rational thought." ([Raine 2014:335](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=335))

#### "Stopping crime before it starts with advanced prediction and treatment efforts. Addressing, with modern technologies and scientific techniques, this grave public-health problem that kills so many globally." ([Raine 2014:343](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=343))

#### "Recidivistic crime is relatively infrequent. [...] most individual criteria of what constitutes psychopathology have significant weaknesses, but when combined together they help describe a gestalt picture of psychopathology against which violent crime may be viewed. Recidivistic offending meets these criteria just as well as most disorders listed in the DSM, and, indeed, it fits better than some already listed." ([Raine 2014:347](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=347))

#### "while some cancers show heritability at a similar level to crime and violence, many cancers are not heritable, even though they have a biochemical genetic basis." ([Raine 2014:348](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=348))

#### "Mutations can be repaired with medication. The speed with which science made progress on the human genome project is just one example of the rapidity of change that is possible. [...] Advances in medication get applied to psychiatric illness. Then from psychiatry there is invariably a trickle-down effect to violence and crime. Take cognitive-behavior therapy, pioneered by Tim Beck at the University of Pennsylvania. It was first developed for depression, and now it is one of the best and most used interventions for adolescent and adult antisocials alike. Take the application of medications for epilepsy, psychosis, and ADHD, which are being used today for aggressive children and adolescents." ([Raine 2014:349](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=349))

#### "The Internet, which so effectively democratized knowledge, has inadvertently resulted in a much smarter breed of crooks who, though failures at school, have succeeded in home-schooling themselves on hightech ways to evade the surveillance of global CCTV. Clearance rates for homicide have moved from a national high of 65 percent in 2010 26 to 38 percent in 2034—arrests of suspects were dropping precariously. Serial killings are on the rise. Prisons are not just full to capacity, they are bursting at the seams. Back in 2012, the United States made up 5 percent of the world's population but was incarcerating 24 percent of the world's prisoners. That number has grown to 31 percent." ([Raine 2014:350](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=350))

#### "Back in 2010, the cost of homicide in the United States was estimated at over $300 billion— more than the combined budgets of the Departments of Education, Justice, Housing and Urban Development, Health and Human Services, Labor, and Homeland Security. [...] 22 percent of all those arrested for murder were probationers and parolees —those who had been released from prison." ([Raine 2014:351](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=351))

#### "all males in society aged eighteen and over have to register at their local hospital for a quick brain scan and DNA testing. One simple finger prick for one drop of blood that takes ten seconds. Then a five-minute brain scan for the "Fundamental Five Functions": First, a structural scan provides the brain's anatomy. Second, a functional scan shows resting brain activity. Third, enhanced diffusion-tensor imaging is taken to assess the integrity of the white-fiber system in the brain, assessing intricate brain connectivity. Fourth is a reading of the brain's neurochemistry that has been developed from magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Fifth and finally, the cellular functional scan assesses expression of 23,000 different genes at the cellular level. The computerization of all medical, school, psychological, census, and neighborhood data makes it easy to combine these traditional risk variables alongside the vast amount of DNA and brain data to form an all-encompassing biosocial data set." ([Raine 2014:352](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=352))

#### "just as we screen for cancer to prevent deaths, we should also screen for violence to prevent loss of life." ([Raine 2014:354](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=354))

#### "National Child Screening Program (NCSP) [...]. Under the new NCSP, parents of some ten-year-olds are informed that their child is a rotten apple. The NCSP determines that little Johnny has a 48 percent chance of developing into a serious violent offender in adulthood, and a 14 percent chance of committing homicide. That's the bad news. The good news, however, is that the NCSP has developed residential treatment programs that should be successful in cutting these odds by more than half, to 18 percent for serious violence and 6 percent for homicide. It does, of course, mean that Johnny will have to be taken away for two years for intensive biosocial therapy, but after that he will be back home." ([Raine 2014:356](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=356))

#### "you should also have a license before you can have a child." ([Raine 2014:358](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=358))

#### "If she is unlicensed, a mother caught with a baby has her child taken away into a foster home but is also offered a crash course on parenting and the opportunity to take the examination. If she passes, her baby will be returned—although there are inevitably yearly follow-ups on her parental skills, given her documented lack of responsibility and law-breaking behavior. DNA banks also allow the biological fathers to be tracked and sanctioned if they are not licensed." ([Raine 2014:360](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=360))

#### "In 2000, magicians in the government conjured up from nowhere the label of "dangerous and severe personality disorder"—in the face of overwhelming opposition from psychiatrists. Under this new legislation, the police have the power to whisk potentially dangerous people off the streets and into holding institutions for further assessment and treatment—even if they have committed no crime. More commonly prisoners who have served out their sentences can be detained further "for the public good." The practice is still ongoing, with the British government contemplating increasing and diversifying its operations. Forensic psychiatrists in both the United Kingdom and the United States, meanwhile, are remonstrating strongly against the increasing pressure to use forensic psychiatry to protect the public." ([Raine 2014:363](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=363))

#### "In 2010, Social Finance launched the first Social Impact Bond, aimed at preventing male prisoners from reoffending upon their release in Peterborough, England. If it reduces reoffending by more than 7.5 percent, the financial savings get returned to investors. So far, savings range from 2.5 percent to 13 percent. President Obama in 2012 slated $100 million for Social Impact Bonds" ([Raine 2014:365](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=365))

#### "Is being a parent any less responsible an activity than being a doctor? Would you go to a doctor if she was not licensed to practice? Parenting a child is not so very different from a therapist caring for a client. If anything, parenting requires much more responsibility." ([Raine 2014:369](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=369))

#### "In 1994 I presented my research findings from Denmark at the annual meeting in San Francisco of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. I showed that a combination of birth complications interacted with early maternal rejection in predisposing babies to be violent offenders eighteen years later. An article in Science in March that year published a figure illustrating my main findings under the headline war of words continues in violence research. It reported my own hope that this new biosocial research could lead to "feasible, practical, and benign ways" of preventing violence. Nevertheless, as Science reported, it was subjected to "a unified and outspoken assault" by other scientists at the meeting, who characterized my findings as "racist and ideologically motivated." My sample was all white, so targeting minorities was not the issue. Instead, the findings suggested that biology worked in concert with social influences—and that was intolerable. Twelve years earlier, in 1982, I had to take a chapter on biosocial influences out of my thesis at the insistence of the external examiner in order to obtain my PhD—even though I had published that work two years earlier in a scientific peer-reviewed journal. Twenty years has seen an enormous change in the political landscape of an anatomy of violence. Back in 1994, suggesting an interaction between biological and social factors in predisposing individuals to violence was anathema. Today it is totally passé. Of course such biosocial interactions occur, what's all the fuss about? In the Netherlands, Wouter Buikhuisen has now been exonerated and given an apology for his persecution, and in my experience the Netherlands today has more interest in neurocriminology than any country outside of North America." ([Raine 2014:376f](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=376))

#### "I do believe that in tomorrow's world we can rise above our feelings of retribution, reach out for rehabilitation, and engage in a more humane discourse on the causes of violence." ([Raine 2014:381](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/DWS9NZZP?page=381))
